



ANNE PAGE


 BY
 NETTA SYRETT
 AUTHOR OF “THE CHILD OF PROMISE,” ETC.


 NEW YORK
 JOHN LANE COMPANY
 MCMIX




 PRINTED BY
 WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED
 LONDON AND BECCLES


 _All rights reserved_




ANNE PAGE




I


At the hour between sunset and twilight Miss Page was generally to be
found in her garden.

The long irregular front of Fairholme Court faced the west, and before
it, through the interminable evenings of summer, was spread the pageant
of the sunset, the quiet glory of the after-glow, and finally the
transition, mysterious, indefinably subtle, from the light of day, to
the vaporous purple of night.

It was at this quiet end of evening that the garden, always beautiful,
took on an added grace, the dream-like delicate charm which belongs to
the enchanted places of the earth--places such as Corot knew, and with
a magic equal to their own, has transferred upon canvasses which hold
for ever the glamour of the dawn or the mystic spell of twilight.

The house, built originally in the last years of Elizabeth, and
enlarged in succeeding reigns, was a medley of incongruous
architecture, resulting in a style delightful and fantastic enough for
a dwelling in a fairy tale. The latest wing, added in Georgian days,
its red brick toned now to a restful mellow colour, imparted an air of
formal stateliness to the irregular but charming structure.

Roses wreathed the latticed window-panes of the older part of
the house; clematis rioted over part of the roof and climbed the
chimney-stacks. On the sunny walls of the later wing a vine had been
trained.

The door of the panelled hall in the middle of the house opened upon
a square of flagstones, and level with these, a lawn, its smoothness
unspoilt by flower-beds, stretched to a sunk fence from which
meadowland, whose broad expanse was broken here and there by groups
of elms, extended far as the eye could see till its verge touched the
sunset sky.

On the lawn to the right of the house, one magnificent beech tree
swept the ground with its lower branches, and then soared majestically
towards the sky. On the left there was a group of chestnuts. But,
except for a small white fountain opposite the hall porch, the lawn in
its velvet softness was left unadorned.

The fountain Miss Page had brought back after one of her periodical
journeys to Italy. It was a slight, graceful thing, of delicate
workmanship, its thread of water falling from a fluted shell into
a square marble basin. It was a fountain beloved by the fan-tailed
pigeons, who from their dovecote behind the kitchen garden came to it
often to drink. When they perched on the edge of the shell, or walked
near it on the grass, their snowy tails outspread, a hint of Italian
courtyards, a sort of fragrance of Italy, was wafted into the English
garden.

All the flowers grew in secluded sheltered spots, protected by high
walls or hedges of yew.

Away from the lawn, behind the beech tree, a moss-grown wall into which
a little gate was set, gave promise of scent and colour within--of a
garden enclosed.

This particular enclosure, one of many, was known as the “lavender
garden.” It was arranged in the formal Dutch fashion--divided into
square beds filled with pink monthly roses, each bed surrounded by a
thick border of lavender. A sundial stood in the midst, and against the
sundial, her elbows resting upon its lichen-stained plate, leant Anne
Page, her face turned towards the lingering sunset.

She was expecting friends to dinner, but unable to resist the
temptation of the garden, she had wandered from the drawing-room into
the sweet evening air. She wore a dress the colour of which, in its
shades of grey-green and purple, might have been suggested by the
lavender in the borders. It was a graceful flowing dress; beautiful
naturally, inevitably. Anne Page possessed the gift of surrounding
herself with everything that was exquisite, as simply as a flower
surrounds itself with leaves and dainty buds.

She was not a young woman. She had indeed travelled quite far on the
road that leads from youth to death.

It was even on record that a girl staying at the vicarage had alluded
to her as an old lady.

Every one had started with shocked surprise. None of Anne Page’s
friends were accustomed to consider her age.

To them, she was just “beautiful Miss Page.” In the same way, one never
thought of analyzing her appearance, nor of criticizing her features.
It would have seemed an impertinence. One felt vaguely that she would
have been quite as lovely without any, for her beauty was like a rare
effect of light that has no connection with the object it transfigures.

Certainly her face had the delicacy of a white rose. Certainly her eyes
were blue; blue as cornflowers; blue as the sea. But they were Miss
Page’s eyes, and one instinctively compared them to lovely natural
things.

She turned her head as the gate creaked.

Burks, in a frilled apron and a becoming cap with streamers, was
hurrying up the path towards the sundial.

“There’s a carriage coming up the drive, ma’am,” she said.

“Thank you, Burks, I’ll come.”

The maid hastened back, her skirts ruffling the lavender borders, and,
gathering up the filmy folds of her own gown, her mistress followed her.

At the gate, she turned for a last glance at the dying sunset sky.

On her way across the lawn, she noticed, with a thrill of pleasure,
the beauty of the trees, motionless, dreaming in the dusk. White and
slim in the half-light, the little fountain suggested to her a strayed
nymph, transfixed with surprise and fear to find herself so near the
haunts of man. Smiling at the fancy, Anne entered the drawing-room by
one of the long open windows, and waited for her guests.

In a few moments, Burks admitted the Vicar and his wife.

The Reverend George Carfax was of the type already somewhat _vieux
jeu_, of the muscular school of Christianity.

Good-looking, clean-shaven, bullet-headed, his appearance was rather
that of a country squire than of a vicar of Christ. An excellent
cricketer, hearty in manner, sound in health, he was nevertheless the
ideal pastor for the rising generation of youths and maidens, whose
muscles were possibly better worth developing than their souls.

His wife was the dowdy little woman, who inevitably by a process of
natural selection becomes the mate of the muscular Christian.

In her first youth she had possessed the undistinguished prettiness
common to thousands of English girls whose character, composed of
negative qualities, renders them peculiarly acceptable to the average
self-assertive man.

Now, at forty-five, in spite of her family of children, her figure was
as spare and meagre as it had been at twenty, and the gown she wore, a
black silk, slightly cut out at the neck, and trimmed with cheap coffee
lace, was as dowdy as any of the dresses of her girlhood.

Miss Page walked with a charming dignity, her long gown moving over the
floor with a soft _frou-frou_ suggestive of silk, and cloudy concealed
frills. Her appearance as she bent towards the dowdy little woman,
made a contrast almost ludicrous, if it had not also been somewhat
pathetic.

Mrs. Carfax, innocent of contrasts and all they implied, took her hand
in both of hers with an affectionate movement, and in the Vicar’s firm
handshake, and in his hearty words of greeting, the same evident liking
for their hostess was expressed.

“Dr. and Mrs. Dakin,” said Burks, at the door, and again Miss Page’s
smile welcomed the new-comers.

She particularly liked the tall thin man who entered. Dr. Dakin was
a scholar and a dreamer, a man too unpractical by nature adequately
to cope with a profession eminently practical. The doctor was only
a partial success at Dymfield, where a man of the Vicar’s stamp,
genial, a trifle blustering, always cheerful, would have inspired more
confidence than the dreamy medical man, who did not treat illness in
the high-handed fashion unconsciously expected by his patients.

Only his success with one or two really serious cases in the
neighbourhood preserved for him some measure of respect, and a general
concurrence of opinion, that absent-minded as he appeared before the
milder forms of ailment, when it came to graver maladies, Dr. Dakin
was presumably to be trusted. To no one was his lack of force and
“push” a greater trial than to his wife, whose ambition for her husband
had been a London practice, and for herself a smart amusing circle of
acquaintances.

She was a pretty little woman of six or seven and twenty, with soft
dark hair, and a slim figure. Endowed with all the nervous energy
her husband lacked, she bore the traces of her discontent about her
well-shaped mouth, and in the expression, exasperated and querulous of
her brown eyes.

They softened into a wholly admiring glance however as they rested on
Miss Page.

“My dear lady,” she whispered, “that’s the most lovely dress I ever saw
in my life! Where _do_ you get your things? And however do you manage
to look so delightful in them?”

Anne laughed.

“Let me return the compliment. You look charming, Madge.”

Mrs. Dakin blushed with pleasure, as she turned to shake hands with
Mrs. Carfax.

“We are waiting for another guest,” said Miss Page, sitting down in one
of the big, chintz-covered chairs. “Monsieur Fontenelle, who, as I dare
say you know, has just been made President of the International Art
Congress.”

Dr. Dakin looked up quickly from the examination of an
eighteenth-century fan, which he recognized as a new treasure in
a cabinet filled with ivories, enamel snuff-boxes, old lace, old
treasures of all kinds.

“Really?” he exclaimed. “That’s most interesting. _The_ Monsieur
Fontenelle, in fact?”

“He’s a very old friend of mine,” said Anne.

“In England for the opening of the show next week, of course?”

“Yes. He’s been staying for a couple of days at The Chase, and as he
goes to London to-morrow I asked him to join us this evening.”

To none of Anne’s visitors but the doctor was the Frenchman’s name
significant.

Dymfield was not interested in the world of art. Very few of its
inhabitants had ever heard of the International Art Congress, and even
if they had, it would have conveyed nothing to their minds.

Nevertheless, a tremor of excitement and curiosity passed over the
faces of Mrs. Carfax and Mrs. Dakin.

Strangers at Dymfield were rare, and a visitor who was staying at The
Chase, as the guest of Lord Farringchurch was on that account alone, a
distinguished if not an alarming personality.

“A Frenchman!” exclaimed Mrs. Carfax. “I hope he speaks English?” she
added below her breath.

“Oh, perfectly,” Anne assured her, as the door opened.

“Monsieur Fontenelle!”

Burks, who had frequently accompanied her mistress in foreign travel,
delivered the name with commendable swing and correctness of accent.

The man who entered looked considerably younger than his forty-seven
years. Slight, still elegant in figure, his face possessed the
distinction of clear-cut features, combined with an expression which
only the charm of his smile saved from a suspicion of arrogance.

His hair, a little white on the temples, was thick and slightly wavy.
His blue eyes, keen above a hawk-like nose, gleamed every now and
then with a trace of irony; that irony which has become habitual,
the recognized medium through which its possessor views the world. A
shrewd observer would have guessed the character represented by such a
face to be difficult and complex. Instinctively one knew that François
Fontenelle would be no very easy man to thwart; one guessed also that
he might be a man apt to form his own rules of conduct, to carve his
own path in life, without too much consideration for the convenience or
the paths of others.

As Miss Page rose and stretched out her hand, he stooped and kissed it
with the graceful ease of manner natural to a Frenchman.

Mrs. Carfax felt quite embarrassed.

“So foreign,” she thought; the phrase expressing unconscious
disapprobation.

“Glad _we_ haven’t those monkey tricks!” was her husband’s half-formed
mental exclamation.

Mrs. Dakin’s heart gave a curious little flutter for which she could
not account, except that she liked the manners of Frenchmen, and was
for the moment acutely conscious of the dulness of life.

To her husband, the action suddenly recalled the days of Madame de
Pompadour.

He glanced at the fan he still held, and his mind wandered to a book
of that lady’s period which he had long coveted, and had hitherto been
unable to obtain.

Absorbed in reverie, he missed Miss Page’s formal introduction, and was
only recalled to the present day by the general movement following the
announcement that dinner was served.

The dining-room at Fairholme Court, in the older part of the house, was
a long, low room with casement windows, and carved beams supporting the
ceiling.

In its midst the table sparkled with glass and silver, arranged with
studied care between the shaded candles in sconces of Sheffield plate,
and the crystal bowls of roses. It had the look of something exquisite,
something in fact which belonged to Miss Page, and was marked with her
individuality.

Mrs. Dakin made anxious notes. Her dinner-table never looked a work of
art, and in the intervals of her study of, and speculations concerning
Monsieur Fontenelle, she wondered why. Several times her glance
wandered to Miss Page, whose eyes were bright, and whose faint pink
colour was rather deeper than usual.

Did the Frenchman she wondered, represent Miss Page’s romance? It was
strange how little one knew about Miss Page. Nothing, in fact. Mrs.
Dakin realized the fact for the first time with a little shock of
surprise. But then one never expected Miss Page to talk about her own
affairs. Quite naturally, inevitably as it seemed, one went to Miss
Page for advice, for sympathy, for encouragement about one’s self.

But this man must belong to the past life of her hostess, whatever it
had been--something charming, something gentle, since Miss Page had
lived it. Of course she had been loved. She was too pretty not to have
been loved. Had this man loved her perhaps? If so, why had they not
married?

Mrs. Dakin roused herself, and began to pay attention to the
conversation to which, so far, she had only contributed mechanical,
unheeding remarks. Indefinitely she felt that it was on a higher level
than usual; the sort of conversation to which Dymfield was unaccustomed.

The Frenchman talked with the vivacity, the wealth of phrase and
imagery common to his race, and Miss Page talked too, eagerly,
fluently, leaning a little forward, as though enjoying a much-loved
rarely indulged delight.

Dr. Dakin, roused at last from his dreaming, also sat upright,
glancing from one to the other, throwing in now and again a question
or a comment which was often seized upon appreciatively to form fresh
material for conversation. Mrs. Dakin sat and wondered, mystified,
scarcely comprehending. The topics over which the talk ranged, abstract
subjects for the most part, illustrated by frequent references to
books;--novels, French novels mostly, of which she sometimes just
knew the titles, philosophy of which she had never heard--belonged
to a class of ideas which as yet had never appeared upon her mental
horizon. She was interested, as well as overwhelmed, by a new view of
her hostess. Miss Page, this brilliant conversationalist, this subtle
reasoner, to whose words the Frenchman, himself so fluent, such an
acute critic and thinker, accorded a deference so obviously spontaneous
and sincere! Miss Page, who would spend hours in discussing the
organization of a mothers’ meeting, of a local flower show, of a Church
bazaar. Miss Page, to whom one applied for recipes for _pot pourri_,
for dainty invalid dishes, for remedies against chills. Miss Page,
who suggested the fashion for one’s new summer muslin, and cut out
night-shirts for the children in the Cottage Hospital!

“How we must bore her!” was Mrs. Dakin’s involuntary mental
exclamation. “And how well, how delightfully she disguises it,” was her
next reflection.

She remembered other dinners at Fairholme Court--dinners at which the
guests had discussed the new curate, the latest book of Miss Marie
Corelli, the village cricket match, the fund for the new organ.

She remembered Miss Page’s gracious charm of manner on these
occasions, her apparent interest in each of these trivial topics.

Even now, surprised, uncomprehending as she was with regard to most
of the conversation, she did not fail to remark the tact which with a
word, with a question easy to answer, she kept three of her guests, at
least, ostensibly within the pale of the conversation.

“It’s quite fair. We are evenly matched, to-night. Our stupidity has
always outweighed her intelligence before, so she never had a chance,”
thought Mrs. Dakin. The bitterness of the reflection was caused by the
conviction that it was ignorance, not lack of ability, which kept her,
at least, out of discussions which interested her. Mrs. Dakin was one
of those women whom mental laziness, not lack of brain quality, goes
far to ruin. Her mind, naturally active and restless, was unemployed.
She had never trained herself to think. To-night, with sudden
self-recognition, she regretted both circumstances.

Harry, she noticed it with a curious sensation, half jealousy, half
pride, was not out of the talk. He was no conversationalist, but he
understood, he appreciated, he contributed. That his point of view
was valuable, she knew by the brightening of Miss Page’s eyes when
he spoke; by an occasional vivacious affirmative nod from Monsieur
Fontenelle.

An idea, odd, staggering in its novelty, occurred to her.

“Perhaps I bore Harry?”

Never before had this aspect of affairs presented itself to her
consciousness, and the notion passed like a flash.

The conviction that the exhausting mental ailment of boredom belonged
by right to her alone, was too firmly established to be upset by a
fugitive ridiculous fancy.

Again she listened.

The Frenchman’s eloquence and vivacity amused and excited her. He spoke
rapidly, and though the words were English, pronounced with only the
slightest foreign accent, their use, their handling was French.

Never before, for instance, had she heard any one utter at length a
panegyric such as that to which she was now listening. It was evoked by
the name of an author of whom she had never heard, and it was the sort
of thing which in a book she was accustomed to skip. Spoken with the
ease and certainty which indicated a natural habit of fluent speech, it
amazed and impressed her.

Never before had she guessed that Miss Page was witty. Wit at
Dymfield was not understood; it was ignored, passed over in silence
disapproving because uncomprehended. Quicker than her neighbours,
Mrs. Dakin realized that in an argument on a play of Bernard Shaw’s
which Monsieur Fontenelle had recently seen in America, Miss Page was
saying good things. In opposing his view, her raillery, delicate and
ingenious, brought a frequent smile to his lips, and more than once an
appreciative burst of laughter.

Mr. Carfax, who had never heard of Bernard Shaw, asked for the story of
the play.

His hostess told it in a few words. That they were in every respect
well chosen, Mrs. Dakin, who had also never read the works of the
latter-day apostle, guessed from a faint smile of admiration, which
at various points in the narrative lighted the Frenchman’s face. Mr.
Carfax nodded his head approvingly when she ceased.

“Very good, I should say. Full of common sense and right views. We want
some one to elevate the stage; and I’m glad this man, what’s his name?
Ah! Shaw--is a Britisher. I believe in home-grown literature; something
that expresses the character of the English people. A fine, sturdy
character; the best in the world.”

Miss Page rose without looking at Monsieur Fontenelle, whose smile, for
greater safety, had taken refuge in his eyes.

Mrs. Dakin and Mrs. Carfax followed her into the drawing-room, and as
though stricken with fear lest the dinner-table topics had resulted in
dissatisfaction for her guests, she moved close to Mrs. Carfax.

“I saw Sylvia, to-day, looking _so_ pretty,” she began in her gentle,
caressing voice.

Mrs. Carfax bridled, half pleased, half unwilling to accept a
compliment on behalf of a daughter who was unsatisfactory.

“Looks don’t matter so much as right behaviour,” she returned. “She
displeases her father very much with what he calls her advanced ideas.
I don’t know what they are, I’m sure, except wanting to get away from a
good home. I wish you would speak to her, Miss Page. She thinks so much
of you. You might bring her to her senses.”

“Poor little Sylvia,” said Miss Page, softly. “She’s very young, my
dear--and she’s a sweet child at heart. Do ask her to come to tea with
me to-morrow.”

“I think your French friend is most interesting,” remarked Mrs. Dakin,
suddenly, putting down her coffee cup, and taking a seat beside Anne on
the sofa.

Her hostess turned to her with a pleased smile.

“I’m so glad. You are always appreciative, Madge.”

“I never heard any one talk like you two,” continued Mrs. Dakin, slowly.

“I’m afraid we talked too much.” The quick colour sprang to her cheeks.
“I hope you weren’t bored?” She included the two women in a swift,
apologetic glance. “Talking too much is an old habit of mine, a habit
of long ago, which revives when I see François. I----” she paused
suddenly.

“I was never so interested in my life,” said Mrs. Dakin, with such
obvious sincerity that Anne’s face cleared.

“Very clever, I’m sure. Very clever,” murmured Mrs. Carfax. “Tell me,
my dear, what shall I do about Emma? The girl gets worse and worse.
She’s no good at all as a parlourmaid. I’ve been thinking about her
all dinner-time, and wondering whether I should give her notice, or
whether----”

The entrance of the three men interrupted the heart-searchings of Mrs.
Carfax.

Monsieur Fontenelle stood a moment just within the door. His eyes fell
upon Mrs. Dakin, who sat in the corner of the sofa, her slender little
figure in its white dress showing to advantage against its coloured
background.

A tremor of pleasure shook her as he drew up a chair of gilded cane,
and leaning over the arm of the sofa, began to talk to her.

Mr. Carfax and Dr. Dakin, who both made simultaneously for Miss Page’s
corner of the room, were met by her with a little amused laugh, to
which each responded.

“We can’t _both_ talk to her,” declared Mr. Carfax, “because of course
we each want her advice.”

“I yield to you,” said the Doctor, characteristically. “But you mustn’t
keep her too long.”

“Time passes all too quickly with Miss Page,” returned Mr. Carfax, with
his hearty laugh. “I can make no promises.”

“Do you really want to consult me?” asked his hostess, turning to him
with her flattering air of undivided, interested attention.

“About many things. There’s that case of Mrs. O’Malley’s. It’s really
very difficult. Now, what would you advise?” He recounted at length
a conversation he had lately held with the drunken old woman, on the
circumstances of whose life, though upon this point she was silent,
Miss Page’s knowledge was considerably fuller than his own.

She listened thoughtfully, and suggested a different method of attack.

“Thank you,” said the Vicar, his brow clearing. “I never thought of
that.”

“Anything else?” asked Miss Page.

“Oh well, yes; but I haven’t time for that now. I must come some other
day. I want to have a long talk with you about Sylvia. I can’t make the
girl out.” He frowned. “She’s so restless and discontented. I can’t
imagine why she doesn’t settle down and be of some little assistance
to her mother. The girl annoys me. I have no patience with the modern
shirking of home duties.”

“Dear little Sylvia!” repeated Miss Page. “She’s coming to tea with
me to-morrow. I always like talking to Sylvia. She’s so pretty and
charming.”

Mr. Carfax looked a little mollified. “There’s Dakin thinking I’ve
overstepped my time-limit,” he declared. “Come along, Dakin, your
innings now.”

The doctor approached Miss Page’s chair, a smile on his long thin face.

“I only want you to show me your latest toys,” he said, glancing at the
cabinet. “I see you have one or two new things there.”

She rose with alacrity, and in a few moments they were bending over
and discussing a piece of Battersea enamel.

Dr. Dakin, also an enthusiastic collector, was especially interested
in the dainty trifles of the eighteenth century, which Anne too
loved. It was a period which specially appealed to him, and the
conversation passing from the frail things they handled--fans painted
on chicken-skin, ivories, patch-boxes--soon extended to books, many of
which he found Anne possessed.

Their conversation became engrossing, and Mrs. Dakin turned to her
companion with a laugh.

“My husband is very happy,” she remarked.

“No wonder,” he returned. “Every one is happy with Miss Page.”

“And she’s so pretty, isn’t she?”

“The most beautiful woman of my acquaintance,” he replied gravely.
“Because she has _acquired_ her beauty--secreted it, in the same
marvellous way that from hidden cells a rose draws its colour and its
sweetness.”

Mrs. Dakin glanced at him curiously. “It takes a Frenchman to say that.
But it describes Miss Page,” she added.

She hesitated a moment, curiosity very strong within her.

“You have known her a long time? Many years?” she asked.

“I first met sweet Anne Page twenty years ago, in this very house.”

He smiled, a quiet reminiscent smile.

“And she wasn’t young even then!” exclaimed Mrs. Dakin, involuntarily.

“Pardon me. Anne Page was always young, in the sense that the brooks
and the hawthorn-trees and the roses are always young.”

The smile was still on his lips, and Mrs. Dakin blushed.

“Oh yes, I know,” she began hurriedly. “One never thinks of age with
regard to her. I didn’t mean that exactly.”

“He must have been in love with her!” The idea ran into the
undercurrent of her thoughts. “Perhaps he is still. It would be awfully
romantic. And not absurd at all,” she added, as a sudden mental
supplement. “Sweet Anne Page is quite pretty.”

Aloud, still impelled by irresistible curiosity, she went on asking
questions.

“But this house didn’t belong to her then, did it? We haven’t been at
Dymfield long enough, of course, but the old people in the village
remember when Mrs. Burbage lived here.”

“Mrs. Burbage! Yes, I’d forgotten. That was the name.”

“It was quite a romantic story, wasn’t it?” went on Mrs. Dakin,
vivaciously. “You know it, of course? Miss Page was companion to old
Mrs. Burbage for years before she died. She had a nephew, and naturally
every one imagined that he would come into the property. But he
displeased her in some way, and she left everything to Miss Page. At
least, so I’m told. Is it right?”

Monsieur Fontenelle bowed. “I believe so.” He laughed suddenly. “When
I first knew the house, it was horrible. This beautiful room, for
instance, was full of antimacassars and wool-work mats. The old lady
had--how do you call it? Mid-Victorian--yes, Mid-Victorian tastes.”

“Glass shades with wax fruits underneath, I suppose? Rep curtains and
that sort of thing.”

“Oh, _c’était affreux_!” he agreed, with a comic gesture of horror.

“How Miss Page must have enjoyed refurnishing it! She has such
exquisite taste, hasn’t she? But the garden? The garden must always
have been lovely.”

“It was neglected. Mrs. Burbage was an invalid--fortunately. For the
garden, I mean. But Anne had begun to work her magic even then. The
first time I ever saw her she had been planting roses round a sundial.”

“Oh, in the lavender garden?”

“She took me there this morning. The rose hedge is very tall now, and
the rose leaves were dropping down on to the sundial”--he stretched up
his arm--“from a height like this, above it.”

“Yes. Fairholme Court is the most beautiful place in the neighbourhood.
Certainly the most beautiful place _I’ve_ ever seen.”

There was a moment’s pause, during which Mrs. Dakin glanced towards the
sofa, to which Anne had returned.

Her green and lavender gown fell in graceful folds round her feet.
Against the cushions of dim purple at her back, her hair shone with
a sort of moon-lit radiance. The poise of her head, the smile that
wavered constantly near her sweet mouth, the radiance of her blue
eyes, above all a certain dignity, too gentle to be quite stately, yet
suggesting stateliness, made her a lovely and a gracious figure.

“Do you know,” said Mrs. Dakin, suddenly, “what surprises me is that
the people who knew her long ago, when she first came here, scarcely
remember her. They say, ‘Oh, she was a quiet creature. Very shy. We
scarcely noticed her. She was just Mrs. Burbage’s companion.’ Things
like that, you know. It has often disappointed me. I should have
thought she must have been so beautiful as a younger woman.”

“She was always beautiful,” said her companion, quietly, “to those who
had eyes to see. But she has learnt to use her beauty. She had first
to learn that she possessed it. That took her a long time.” Again he
smiled his odd little smile of reminiscence. “They are quite right when
they say that she was shy. There are many people in the world, madame,
who could be beautiful if they knew how. Beauty, the truest beauty,
is an art. A subtle blend of many powers, mental and moral, which
result in a mastery of the physical qualities. A knowledge of them,
a perfect handling, a moulding of them to the ideal of the spirit.
Do you remember what your critic Pater, says of _Mona Lisa_? It is a
well-known passage, but it expresses what I am trying to say so poorly,
so inadequately.”

Mrs. Dakin shook her head. “I’m a very ignorant person,” she said, with
an embarrassed laugh.

“He is speaking of the portrait--which is lovely, according to the
spirit rather than the flesh, and he says, ‘_It is a beauty wrought
out from within upon the flesh, the deposit, little cell by cell, of
strange thoughts and fantastic reveries, and exquisite passions._’”

Mrs. Dakin wrinkled her forehead. The last words shocked her a little.
Her plea of ignorance was a true one in every sense of the word. It
was the plea of a woman who had passed most of her life with ordinary
conventional people, as oblivious to the complexities of human life as
to the world of ideas in art, in philosophy, in all the realms invaded
by human thought and emotion.

If her existence was troubled, it was with the discontent of a child
who cries for the moon which it regards as a pretty material plaything,
rather than the trouble of a woman to whom the moon is a symbol of the
rare, the exquisite things of life, which she weeps to find beyond her
reach.

Yet her next remark pleased her companion.

“I think what you said about the rose describes her much better,” she
ventured, rather timidly.

He smiled. “You’re quite right. I see you understand our sweet Anne
Page. She doesn’t belong to the _Mona Lisa_ type. She’s made up of all
the beautiful natural things; of the sunlight and the roses, and the
dew. _Tiens!_ Don’t say I’m ignorant of your poets. One of them has
come rather near it when he says, ‘_And beauty born of murmuring sound
has passed into her face._’”

Mrs. Dakin had never heard the lines before, and hurriedly wondered how
she could find them. She felt flattered, shy, and troubled at the same
moment. It was rather a fearful joy to be talked to by this Frenchman,
who was evidently so used to what she called “clever” people, that he
quite naturally assumed her comprehension of his language. She wondered
who _Mona Lisa_ was, and half thought of asking Harry. It occurred to
her that Harry read a great deal; that his study was lined with books
into which she had never thought of looking. He never talked to her
about them.

“I suppose that’s because he thinks me too stupid,” was her impatiently
scornful reflection.

She was half relieved, half sorry when Mrs. Carfax, with a conventional
exclamation upon the lateness of the hour, rose to go.

“Good-bye,” she said, holding out her hand to her companion.

She hesitated, and then, shyness making the words a little brusque--

“If you are ever here again, I hope Miss Page will bring you to see
us,” she added.

“_Enchanté_, madame!” he returned with his easy bow and smile.

“Delightful fellow that!” exclaimed Dr. Dakin, as he stepped into the
motor-car after his wife. He spoke with an animation unusual to him.
“It’s been a nice evening, hasn’t it, Madge?”

“Very,” she returned shortly, pulling the rug round her, and relapsing
into silence.

She was thinking of the Frenchman’s smile, and of his voice. He had
beautiful hands, she remembered. Her husband looked at her and sighed
a little. He would liked to have discussed the party, but Madge was in
one of her moods, and he knew that the attempt would be useless.

       *       *       *       *       *

“There’s an air of unreality about foreigners,” remarked Mr. Carfax,
pulling up the window with a jerk, as the hired brougham turned out of
the drive.

“Theatrical, rather--the way that fellow talked, wasn’t it?”

“Quite absurd,” agreed his wife. “I didn’t listen. Miss Page is
generally more interesting than she was to-night.”

“Yes. Women do better as a rule, to keep to the subjects that suit
them,” announced the Vicar. “Not that Miss Page isn’t a clever woman,
I believe. At least, Dakin says so, and _he_ ought to know.”

“I suppose this Monsieur--what’s his name--was one of the friends she
made when she was travelling?”

“I suppose so. She was away long enough to make shoals of them.”

“You didn’t know her, George, did you, when you were a young man?”

The Vicar shook his head. “I may have seen her once or twice when she
was old Mrs. Burbage’s companion. I had just left college then, and
was at my first curacy in Nottingham--just before we were married, you
know. I came back to the Vicarage once or twice in those days to see
the old Dad, and I suppose she must have been at Fairholme Court then.
But I don’t remember her. She was nurse and general factotum to the
old lady. Mrs. Burbage was an eccentric woman, you know; rather dotty
towards the end, I believe. I can imagine that poor Miss Page hadn’t
much of a life with her.”

“And then directly she had the place left to her, she shut it up and
went away?”

“Yes. That must be nearly twenty years ago. How time flies!”

“I remember we came to the Vicarage just after she had gone, when
Sylvia was a baby; the year after your father died. It was a
nine-days’ wonder then. And I remember the people at The Chase saying
what a piece of luck it was for such a dowdy quiet woman to come into a
fortune.”

“They can’t say that now!” observed the Vicar.

“No. I never was so surprised in my life as the first time I saw her.
That must be ten years ago now, George?”

“Yes. She was away ten years, and she’s been back at the Court nearly
the same time. That makes it about twenty years, as I thought. Dear me,
it seems impossible!”

“She doesn’t alter at all, does she? Her hair may have got a little
whiter since I first saw her, but I believe she’s prettier even. Well!
Foreign travel must be wonderful if it can change a plain, dowdy
creature into a woman like Miss Page.”

“Money!” exclaimed the Vicar, sententiously. “Money. It may be the root
of all evil, but it’s a great power--a great power, Mary.”

“Mrs. Dakin’s always very much over-dressed, isn’t she?” remarked his
wife, as they approached the Vicarage porch.

“Yes. Foolish little woman that--foolish little woman. Take care how
you get out, Mary; the step is awkward.”

The sound of a high sweet voice floated out upon the darkness, and Mrs.
Carfax looked up sharply at a lighted window on the first floor.

“There’s Sylvia singing!” she exclaimed in an exasperated tone. “She’ll
wake all the children. Run up and tell her to stop at once, George!
Really, she is the most annoying girl I ever met.”




II


Left alone for a few moments while his hostess was making her farewells
in the hall, Monsieur Fontenelle sat still admiring the beautiful room,
quiet now, its long windows open to the night and to the sound of the
whispering trees.

Lighted by pink-shaded candles, its white panelled walls, its
rose-patterned chintz curtains and chair-covers gave it an air of
exquisite freshness and purity. Everywhere there were flowers. Roses
glowed between the candles on the mantelpiece. China bowls filled with
sweet peas, with pink mallows, with snapdragon, stood on tables, or on
the top of Sheraton bureaus. Even the deep fireplace was filled with
flowering plants.

Appreciatively, Monsieur Fontenelle glanced at the delicate workmanship
of a Chippendale chair, noticed the graceful shape of a writing-table,
and the beauty of an inlaid bookcase with a lattice-work of wood over
its diamond panes. There were only one or two pictures on the walls,
whose creamy surface made a restful background to the colour in the
room. Monsieur Fontenelle examined them. His quick eye detected a
Corot, a tiny sketch of Whistler’s, and then on the wall opposite to
him, a landscape at the sight of which a peculiar brightness sprang to
his eyes.

He crossed the room and stood looking at it. He was still looking at it
when the rustle of a gown made him aware that Miss Page had come back.

Then he turned. She was standing just within the door, watching him,
and in her eyes also there was the same curious brightness.

He looked at her a moment whimsically, without moving.

“You are a wonderful woman!” he exclaimed at last, speaking in French.

“Why?” she returned in the same language.

He shrugged his shoulders.

“I leave that to the _bon Dieu_ who made you. He’s responsible, I
suppose, for women of your type.”

She smiled without replying.

“You tell me you’re happy?” he asked.

“Quite happy, François.”

Again he shrugged his shoulders. “Come, let us talk,” he said, taking
her by both hands and leading her to the sofa. “I only saw you for ten
minutes this morning.”

“Let us talk,” she replied. And in French, “_Ça me fera du bien_.”

Instead of speaking at first, he looked at her.

“Anne,” he exclaimed after a moment, “you are amazing! How do you
manage it? You look younger than the day I first saw you.”

“But I was old then,” she returned, shaking her head--“very old. A
woman who had done with life.”

He answered her seriousness with a slow smile.

“Life had not done with you, had it?”

She did not reply, and with a change of voice, he said--

“So these are your neighbours.”

“Some of them. They are dear people. I can’t tell you half their
kindness to me.”

“It’s not difficult to be kind to sweet Anne Page.”

She gave him a quick glance. “It’s nice to hear the old name again.”

“No name ever suited a woman better. So you can live with the
inhabitants of Dymfield without boring yourself to extinction? But of
course you can. I never saw you bored.”

“Boredom is a modern disease, isn’t it? And you know I am not a modern
woman.”

“Thank God!” he exclaimed with fervour. “The little woman whose pretty
head I’ve been puzzling all the evening, suffers from it terribly,
though.”

“Boredom? You’re very quick, François. You always were. Poor little
thing!” she added with a sigh.

“Why? Doesn’t her husband amuse her?”

She shook her head. “No. It’s one of those unnecessary tragedies of
life. They don’t try to understand one another. The material for
happiness is all there, and they miss it. He’s a dear fellow. Kind, and
good; and a scholar too, as of course you discovered.”

“Yes. You have one person at least with whom you need not talk in words
of one syllable.”

“Words of one syllable are often the sweetest.”

He laughed. “You remind me of the lady from whose lips whenever she
opened them, a flower fell. Your floors ought to be strewn with roses
and violets by this time. But come! I don’t want to discuss your
neighbours. I want to talk about you. Do you know that in ten years I
have only seen you three times? And you must have been through Paris
very often. What have you to say for yourself?”

“Twice when I went to your studio you were away. The last time, the
_concièrge_ told me you were with a lady.”

“Well?”

“Well I didn’t come up, of course.”

He laughed. “Anne! You are the same Anne. So demure--so discreet.”

“I thought you would have married by this time, François,” she said
after a moment.

He shook his head. “No dear Anne, you didn’t. You know I am not the man
to marry.”

She returned his glance. “You are right,” she answered quietly. “You
have become such a celebrity François, that I ought to be afraid of
you,” she added.

His face changed. “I have become a popular painter, you mean.”

“You are not satisfied?” She put the question softly.

He shrugged his shoulders. “One becomes what one is fit to become.
I’m a lazy devil, Anne. It wasn’t in me to bear the heat and burden
of the day without my hire. I have learnt to give the public what it
wants, and to laugh in my sleeve at its stupid shouting. The result
is that in every paper the world is assured that I have achieved an
international reputation. And next week I shall stand at the head of
a staircase, solemnly shaking by the hand, innumerable stupid people
who know nothing, and care less about art, but have come because it is
one of the functions of the season, to stare at the President of the
International Art Congress. _Quelle farce!_”

He laughed a little. “It seems far enough away from that summer twenty
years ago, when we all sat in that garden,” he nodded towards the open
window, “and talked of our dreams and our ambitions. Ah! we were going
to revolutionize art, weren’t we? We were going to bring the world to
our feet like the young painters in _L’Oeuvre_, do you remember? The
young painters who used to walk about Paris, talking, for ever talking,
mad with hope and enthusiasm. And now? Henri is writing for _La Presse_
... _Sacré tonnerre de Dieu_, as Lantier and Sandoz used to remark
so frequently. What stuff! And how it pays! (Henri has a flat, Rue
Malesherbes--Empire right through.) Paul has abandoned music, and is
making vast sums on the Bourse, and I am President of the International
Art Congress.”

He paused.

“And René is dead,” said Anne.

There was a silence. The lamp-lit room with its colour and fragrance
was very still. To both of them, their minds filled with the scenes of
other days, it assumed for a moment an air of brilliant unreality,
like a room seen in a dream. Outside, the trees whispered very softly.

“Whom the gods love----” began François.

He rose abruptly, and moved to the picture he had been examining when
Anne entered.

“That’s the real stuff!” he exclaimed. “God! how good it is! How did
you get this?” he asked.

“I bought it.”

He wheeled abruptly round. “Have you much of his work?”

“I bought all I could get. _The Bathers_ and _The Forest_ are in my
room upstairs.”

“Then France is the poorer by three masterpieces.”

“France will get them back at my death.”

“You have arranged that?”

She nodded. “They belong to his country, of course.”

He came and sat beside her again. “I told you that the Luxembourg had
bought my portrait of you?”

“Yes. Dear François the news gave me more pleasure than anything I have
heard about you for a long time.”

“It was to be my masterpiece, if you remember. They’re quite right.
I’ve never done anything to touch it since. It belongs to my youth.”

He saw that she was pale, and that her eyes looked sad.

“I’ve distressed you. I’m a brute!” he declared impulsively. “And we’re
not all _hommes ratés_, thank Heaven! Some of the men of the old Rue de
Fleurus days are not to be despised.”

“Thouret, Bussières, Giroux,” murmured Anne.

“Yes; they have big names now. But after all Anne, it’s you who have
made an art of _life_. You’re the only real success. You and René--who
was wise enough to die,” he added.

“Talk to me about Paris,” Anne urged. “What is your new studio like?
Very gorgeous, I suppose?”

“It’s the studio of a popular portrait-painter. Now you know all about
it.”

“And the Duclos? And Georges Pasteurs?”

He began to talk gaily, while she questioned him, and they both laughed
at reminiscences. There was no end to her eager inquiries.

“How you remember the people!” exclaimed François, presently.

“How can I forget?” she asked.

It was late when he rose to go.

“To-morrow, early I start for London, to prepare for the fuss of next
week. I’m glad you won’t be there, Anne.”

His whimsical mocking smile met her as she raised her eyes.

“I should prefer you not to see your old friend playing the solemn
fool.”

He shrugged his shoulders. “Well! One can’t have everything, and I have
five thousand a year. It’s enough to make one comfortable.”

“But not happy,” she said gently.

“That, till forty, depends on one’s temperament. Afterwards on one’s
dinner. I’m very happy to-night. Your cook was chosen with your usual
discretion.”

She laughed.

“You will be coming through Paris this winter?”

“Not to stay. Paris hurts me a little, old woman as I am. On my way
back, in the spring perhaps.”

He kissed her hand. “Most certainly in the spring. It’s _au revoir_.”




III


An hour after her friend had gone, Miss Page sat by the open window in
her bedroom. The room was full of moonlight, for she had put out the
candles and drawn back the curtains.

Somewhere in the garden, or near it, a nightingale was singing.

Deep shadows lay across the lawn, and all the trees were dreaming.
Far out, the meadows covered with a light mist, were like a mystic
silver-flooded sea.

For a long time Anne did not move. Her long talk had revived memories.
They crowded so swiftly to her mind that she grew bewildered, and
as though impelled by a sudden impulse to seek relief, she rose and
crossed the room to a tall bureau opposite the window.

Its interior revealed a number of pigeonholes, and tiny cupboards with
brass knobs. Pressing a spring under one of these, a deep drawer sprang
open.

She felt in its recesses for a moment, and presently drew out a book
bound in a linen cover. Then lighting a candle and placing it on the
table near the window, she resumed her seat.

In the quiet air the candle flame burnt clear and steady, and opening
the book, Anne began to read a journal begun in her childhood. The
volume was an ordinary thick exercise book such as schoolgirls use, and
on the first page, in a large childish hand, was written--

    “_Anne Page_,
      “_Tufton Street_,
        “_Dalston_,
          “_London, 18--_.

    “This is my birthday,” it began. “I am twelve to-day, and I
    have made up my mind to keep a diary like Charlotte and Emily
    and Anne Brontë. At least I think they didn’t exactly keep a
    diary. They wrote down what they were all doing at a certain
    time, and then four years afterwards, they opened their papers
    and compared notes. I think that was a good plan. But I shall
    write in my book once a year, on my birthday. So few things
    happen to me that I dare say that will be quite enough.

    “As I have never written a journal before, I will say all I can
    remember about myself before this birthday. Perhaps if I don’t,
    I shall have forgotten it by the time I’m old.

    “I live at Dalston, and father is one of the curates at
    St. Jude’s. Mother died when I was two years old, so I
    don’t remember her. She left me her watch and chain and two
    bracelets. I have one brother Hugh, but last year he ran away
    from home, and went to sea. He ran away because he wasn’t
    happy. Father was very strict with him. It is a good thing
    to be a boy, and be able to run away. I can’t, because girls
    can’t be sailors, and there’s nowhere to run to. I miss Hugh
    dreadfully. He was fourteen, and he was very nice to me. I
    still cry about him sometimes at night. But it’s no good.

    “Our house is very ugly. It’s in a street. It has a little back
    garden, but nothing will grow there because it’s full of cats.

    “I have a governess. Her name is Miss Atkins. She comes every
    day at half-past nine, and gives me lessons till twelve. Then
    we go for a walk. But there are no nice walks here. In the
    afternoon I do needlework, and learn my lessons for the next
    day, and Miss Atkins goes at six o’clock. She has corkscrew
    curls, and her hair is sandy like Thomas, our cat. She is
    cross every arithmetic day, because I can’t do arithmetic.
    But she says it’s because I won’t, but that is not true. I
    like history and poetry, and all about the poets and writers.
    And especially Shakespeare. Sometimes I read out of Lamb’s
    tales for my reading lesson. I should like to read out of
    Shakespeare, but Miss Atkins won’t let me. She says it isn’t
    fit. I don’t know why she says this, because I have found a
    Shakespeare in father’s study, and some of it is beautiful. I
    like the Midsummer-Night’s Dream, and Romeo and Juliet. The
    Shakespeare is the only nice book in the house. Most of them
    are sermons, and about religion.

    “I’m going to put a wicked thing in this book, so I must be
    careful always to lock it up. _I don’t like religion._

    “Miss Atkins says she loves God, and I asked her whether father
    did. She was shocked, and said of course he did, because he was
    a curate. I wish he loved _me_, but I don’t think he does. He
    is nearly always cross, and I’m always being punished.”

Miss Page let the book fall on to her lap. Mechanically she turned
her face towards the meadows with their islands of motionless trees
emerging from the mists. But she did not see them. The childish words,
already considerably more than forty years old, already a little yellow
and faded, had brought into sight instead, the dreary house in Tufton
Street. With the clearness and precision of actual vision, she saw the
narrow staircase covered with oilcloth, which led up to the bedroom in
which she had spent so many hours of solitary confinement.

She saw the pattern on the shabby wall-paper. She saw her little iron
bedstead, covered with a counterpane of thick white material, with a
raised pattern upon its surface; the curtains of dingy drab rep on
either side of a red blind; the outlook across a leaden street, swept
by wind and rain.

She thought of her father, a morose, irritable man whose persistent bad
temper, condoned to himself under the guise of necessary chastisement,
had driven her brother from the house.

She remembered him in the clothes of his office, shabby and ill-cut,
going doggedly about the duties which in later years she knew had been
uncongenial.

Half reluctantly Anne took up the book again.

    “I said that nothing ever happened to me. But one lovely thing
    happened last year. I went to stay at Dymfield, with Mr. and
    Mrs. Burbage. Mr. Burbage was some relation to my mother--a
    cousin, I think. Anyhow they wrote to father, and asked him to
    let me come. Their house is called Fairholme Court, and it is
    a lovely house, only the furniture is ugly (except upstairs
    in some of the bedrooms, where Mrs. Burbage can’t see it).
    Mrs. Burbage is very funny. She was kind to me, and I liked
    her rather, but not nearly so much as Mr. Burbage. I liked him
    better than any one I ever saw, though he doesn’t talk much,
    but reads all day long. Perhaps that’s what makes his eyes look
    so tired and sad. He has a lovely study full of books, and he
    let me read anything I liked. It was there that I read about
    Charlotte and Emily and Anne Brontë. They are very interesting,
    but I wish Emily had been called Anne, like me, instead of
    the youngest one. I like Emily best. And I read Hans Andersen
    too, and when I came away Mr. Burbage gave it to me. It is the
    loveliest book in the world. My favourite story is ‘The Little
    Sea Maid.’ Some day when I am grown up, I will go to places
    where there are orange trees, and marble palaces, and the sea
    is quite blue.

 “My bedroom was so pretty. It was like a room in a fairy-tale. There
 was furniture with spindly legs in it; the kind of furniture Mrs.
 Burbage said was ugly and old-fashioned. But I thought it was very
 pretty. There were white curtains to the bed, and the wall-paper had
 pink rosebuds on it, and the window was like a little door with lots
 of tiny panes, and it pushed outwards. There was clematis all round
 the window, and white roses which tried to grow into the room. In the
 morning I used to hear the birds chirping in their nests, and then I
 used to jump out of bed, and see the sun rising over the fields. And
 the garden was all shining with dew, and everything look _enchanted_.

 “I was there a month, while Miss Atkins was away for her holiday,
 and I was _too_ happy. But now I shall never go there again, because
 father has had a quarrel with Mr. Burbage. It was something about me,
 I think.”

Her eyes still fixed on the round handwriting, Anne’s memory was
working.

Years later she knew that her old friend had once loved her mother, his
cousin and playfellow. At her father’s death she had found, on going
through his papers, the letter in which he had offered to provide for
the child of the woman who would not be his wife. It was a letter full
of tact and delicate feeling, but it indicated how much of the little
girl’s loneliness he knew and understood.

He pointed out that companions of her own age were necessary for the
happy development of her temperament. He wanted to educate her with
some neighbour’s children, so that she might live at Fairholme Court,
in the country which she loved. She was not strong, he declared, and
London air obviously did not suit her. There would of course be no
attempt to separate her from her father. She could return to him during
the holidays, whenever he wished to see her.

It was a letter written from full knowledge of the circumstances.

He knew the atmosphere of struggling poverty in which Anne, as the
daughter of a curate with an income of little more than a hundred
a year, passed her existence. He knew also that the man had little
tenderness for his daughter, and he hoped that his suggestion might
come as a relief.

Even at the age of twelve, Anne could have undeceived him.

Already, unable as yet to put her knowledge into definite form, she
knew her father well.

Gloomy and morose, a man of narrow intelligence and invincible
obstinacy, he resented any overtures which to his mind savoured of
patronage.

In later years Anne knew the bitterness of his life.

The son of a rich stockbroker, he had just finished his course at
Cambridge when the financial ruin, which killed his father, struck the
death-blow to his own ambitions also.

He had been reading for the Church, with dreams, easy as it then seemed
to be realized, of a splendid living, and a possible bishopric.

The girl to whom he was engaged, the daughter of an impoverished Irish
landlord, was penniless.

She refused to give him up, and he married her, after taking orders,
and entering the Church as a miserably paid curate. Together they
settled in the dingy little house near the Church of St. Jude, at
Dalston, to prove that love in poverty was a different matter from the
same emotion experienced in affluence.

Henry Page was not strong enough to bear misfortune well.

His temper, naturally irrational and impatient of hardship--a temper
which it would have required much material prosperity to soften, became
soured and exacting under the stress of daily anxious necessity. Five
years after their marriage, his young wife, crushed and saddened, gave
up the struggle and died, leaving her two children in no very gentle
hands.

The boy, determined to call his life his own, had cut the knot of
uncongenial family existence by flight.

Anne was left.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Page turned over the leaves of the exercise book slowly.

On the whole, the child she remembered had kept her resolution fairly
well.

“_To-day is my birthday. I am thirteen. I am fifteen. I am seventeen._”
The words marking another year met her eyes constantly as she fluttered
the pages. Several times there was a mention of Hugh. She had heard
from him. He was getting on. He hoped some day to be captain of a
trading vessel. He had sent her some funny writing-paper from Japan.
Another time it was a pressed flower, or some curious seeds from the
South Sea Islands.

Once--this was recorded after her seventeenth birthday--he had come
home for a week.

“He is nineteen, and so brown and handsome and strong,” was the
remark in the journal. “He did not get on well with father. He told
him that I ought to go away--that I had no friends, and that my life
was very dull. Father was terribly angry. Now Hugh has gone, and I’m
wretched--_wretched_. The house is so quiet. I can hear the clock in
the hall ticking even when I’m upstairs in my bedroom. It is raining,
and the sky is like lead.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Anne still turned the leaves. There were big gaps in the journal, but
if they had been filled, the word across the page would have been the
classic _nothing_ of the diary of Louis XVI.

In thought Anne went back over the long, dreary years--the incredibly
empty years of a woman whom lack of means as well as lack of
opportunity cuts off from the world.

A woman moreover, whose youth was spent under conditions less elastic,
less favourable to development than those of modern days.

The cold bare nave of St. Jude’s rose vividly in her mind. She saw the
pews full of women in frowsy faded bonnets--the bonnets of Dalston.

She saw the parish room lighted by unshaded gas-burners, in which, shy
as she was, she had held classes for work-girls. Again she watched them
bending over their desks, giggling and nudging one another when she
entered the room.

She remembered the look of the street when after the appointed hour for
her class, she emerged from the stuffy room into the night air.

There was a butcher’s shop opposite, with a row of flaring lights, and
the butcher in a greasy apron used to stand upon the pavement shouting
his wares to the hurrying passers-by.

Then there was the return to the dingy house. A hurried lighting of the
gas in the entrance passage, the glare of which revealed the oil-cloth
on the floor, growing more worn and shabby every year. How well Anne
remembered what was left of the pattern of that oil-cloth!

A descent into the kitchen followed, where she prepared the supper, and
directed the clumsy movements of Harriet, the little maid-of-all-work.

Supper then with her father, who sometimes scarcely raised his head
from his plate, and seldom spoke a word.

Anne remembered one or two of the curates who had tried to make friends
with her.

One of them who sometimes insisted upon walking back with her from
her evening class, had hovered upon the verge of a mild flirtation.
But to Anne, desperately shy and unused to the society of her
fellow-creatures, his words were meaningless and embarrassing.
Moreover, her father was unpopular. Frequently embroiled with his
colleagues, none of them sought his society, and none ventured to a
house to which they were never invited.

In retrospect, she scarcely needed aid from the journal, Anne saw the
years pass in grey procession. There was no note of revolt in the
record of her girlhood’s days, and the reading was the sadder for its
absence. No revolt, no bitterness. Only a sad acquiescence with fate, a
gradual numbing of sensation, a sort of mental and moral apathy, grey,
leaden, hopeless.

She paused at the words which followed the announcement of her
twenty-seventh birthday.

“Last week father was taken suddenly very ill. The doctor is afraid it
is paralysis.”

For three years there was no further word in the book, but Anne knew
those three years by heart.

They were passed chiefly between the sick-room and the kitchen, in
which she prepared invalid food, and directed the little maid in the
management of the housework. Helpless as a child, her father required
constant unremitting attendance, and when on the eve of her thirtieth
birthday he died, Anne found herself literally penniless. The long
illness had swallowed up his scanty earnings, and, unprepared for any
work in the world, his daughter was left to face starvation.

Fastened inside the book was the letter which saved her.

It was written in the thin, quavering handwriting of an old woman even
then ill and feeble. She opened and read it.

    “Fairholme Court,
      “February, 18--

    “_My dear Anne_,

    “_The news of your loss has just reached me. Before he died, my
    husband made me promise that if you were ever free, I would ask
    you to come to me. Will you come now? I am an old woman, and an
    invalid. In any case, before long I must have had a companion
    who would look after me, and nurse me when necessary. I cannot
    offer you a very cheerful home, but if you come you will be
    welcome._

    “_With sincere sympathy for the grief you have sustained_,

    “_Believe me_,
        “_Sincerely yours_,
            “_JANE BURBAGE_.”

On the next page, the last written page in the book, Anne read these
words:--

    “To-morrow I go to Fairholme Court. It is eighteen years since
    I saw it. I am now thirty years old, and what I said as a
    child is still true. Nothing has ever happened to me. Nothing
    will ever happen now. It is not surprising. I am very plain,
    and nothing happens to a plain woman who is also poor. I ought
    to be very grateful to Mrs. Burbage. She has probably saved
    me from starving. I _am_ very grateful. But to-night I can’t
    feel anything except that I don’t care to go on living. If I
    were a religious woman I should think this sinful, but what I
    said as a child is still true. I don’t like religion. I mean
    that it has never affected me. Never made me happy. Perhaps I
    have never yet found the religion to suit me. I don’t know.
    To-morrow I begin a new life, but it will be again a life of
    nursing.

    “I try to be grateful for a home. I try to feel cheerful. But
    all feeling seems to have gone. I remember my thoughts as a
    child. I was often very eager then, and hopeful. I was often
    sure in my heart that something delightful would happen to me.
    But now nothing seems worth while, and I am only very tired.
    Perhaps when I feel better I shall be glad that Fairholme Court
    is beautiful and in the country. To-night even that doesn’t
    matter.

    “Hugh wrote to me after father’s death. He has saved a little
    money, and with another man, a friend, he is going to start
    a sheep farm in New Zealand. He is engaged to be married to a
    girl he met on one of his voyages. She has since returned to
    England, and they will have to wait till he has made a home for
    her before they can marry. But he seems full of hope, and is
    very happy.

    “I am chiefly thankful for Mrs. Burbage’s invitation, because
    now I need not be a burden to him. As it is, he has sent me
    money which he can ill afford, though without it I could
    not have existed during the past few months. He wanted my
    photograph, and, to please him, I had it taken. The other
    copies will be wasted. There’s no one else in the world who
    wants my picture. All my things are packed. This is the end of
    my life here. I wish it were the end altogether.”

A photograph, one of the wasted copies, was placed between the leaves,
at the last written page.

Anne took it up, and examined it by the light of the expiring candle.

She saw a sad quiet face, with thick hair parted smoothly on either
side of the forehead. It was a face which looked older than the one now
bent over it. A disfiguring gown, fastened with a little tucker at the
neck, concealed the long line of the throat. Except for the indication
of a clear cut chin, and a mouth sweet, despite its sadness, there was
no beauty, not even a suggestion of grace or charm in the picture.

Anne replaced the photograph, and slowly shut the book.

There was a look of terror on her face. She had called up a ghost--the
ghost of her past self.

Like a woman whose one idea is flight, she half rose, and for a moment
glanced with frightened eyes about the room.

Dawn was breaking. The eerie, grey light showed her the embroidered
linen coverlet on her bed, the spindle-legged dressing-table which had
once stood in the little white bedroom upstairs, the flowered curtains
at the window, the bowl of sweet peas on the table at which she had
been sitting.

She drew a deep breath, and moved close to the window.

The air thrilled with the voices of the birds. The trees were still
motionless, as though waiting for the sun; and grey with dew, the
meadows stretched away towards the dim horizon. In the rose-garden on
the right, beneath the sheltering wall, the sun-dial glimmered white as
pearl in the dawn-light.

The candle flared up, and went out with a flicker.

Anne turned, and groping her way in the half light, replaced the book
in the drawer, and touched the spring which closed it.




IV


At four o’clock, Sylvia Carfax swung the gate of the Vicarage garden
behind her, and stepped into the dusty road.

It was nearly a mile to Fairholme Court, and the sun blazed in a sky of
cloudless blue, and beat upon her shoulders protected only by a blouse
of thin muslin.

Sylvia was just twenty, tall slim, and, as Miss Page suggested very
pretty.

In her own mind Anne often wondered when she looked at the girl’s rich
black hair, which made such a striking contrast to eyes blue as the
sky, that from the shelter of the Vicarage and all it represented such
a southern, opulent type of beauty should have emerged.

To reach her destination Sylvia had to walk through the village, past
the blacksmith’s, and past the baker’s shop, with its quaint carving
over the entrance porch.

Dymfield was an ideally beautiful village, to which even the doctor’s
motor-car scarcely brought more than a hint of the rush and hurry and
ugliness of much of modern life.

In the gardens of the thatched cottages, summer flowers made a blaze of
colour. Roses and honeysuckle clambered over porch and roof.

The church, resting peacefully in the green sea of the churchyard,
was like some great rock, stained with lichen, crumbling with age,
beautiful in its decay.

Near it, under the shade of mighty elms, was a row of almshouses, fine
specimens of black-and-white work, and at the end of the rambling
street stood the old well, with its canopy of wrought iron, and its
ancient moss-grown steps.

As she passed through the village in which from babyhood she had lived,
Sylvia recognized its beauty and its peace. It seemed a place where
it was always afternoon, and for that reason, to the girl who yearned
for the morning, herself in the glad confident morning of life, it was
intolerable.

She gave herself an impatient little shake, and hurried on.

Now, across the green, the beeches of Fairholme Court were in sight.

In summer they almost completely screened the house, and made deep
shadows in the drive. Thankfully Sylvia plunged into the shade and
quickened her steps.

The hall door was wide open, revealing the coolness of the
white-panelled hall, and as she entered, the air was sweet with the
scent of flowers.

She stopped a moment to bend over a great bowl of sweet peas.

“Everything is peaceful here too,” she thought. “But it’s interesting
as well. I wonder why?”

The appearance of Burks, immaculate as usual in snowy cap and apron,
interrupted her vague musing.

“Mistress is upstairs in her sitting-room. I’ll tell her you’re here,
miss.”

“Thank you Burks, she expects me. I’ll go up.”

The maid disappeared, and Sylvia ran up the shallow stairs to the first
floor, and knocked at a door on the right.

“Ah! my dear child!”

Anne half rose from a couch which was placed close to the window.

The matting blinds outside were half drawn to keep out the glare of the
sun, and the room was filled with a light soft and green, as though it
had filtered through a canopy of leaves. Beneath the blinds one caught
a glimpse of one of the rose-gardens. Protected by a yew hedge, roses
of all colours lifted their sweet, hot faces to the sun. A grass path
running down the middle of the garden ended at a white seat, in a bower
of white blossom.

Sylvia drew a deep breath. “I believe all the delicious scents in the
world are here!” she exclaimed.

“That’s why I like this room in the afternoon,” said Anne. “The sun
draws all the sweetness out of the roses, and sends it up here. Take
off your hat, my child. You’ve had a tiring walk, I’m afraid.”

“I’d walk twenty miles in the sun to find you at the end of them,”
declared Sylvia, vehemently.

Anne laughed, as she got up and rang the bell for tea.

Her white wrapper of cambric and lace trailed after her as she moved.
Sylvia touched it with reverent fingers.

“You look so sweet in these things,” she said.

“I ought to have changed my gown properly to receive you. But I was
reading, and too lazy to move.”

Sylvia picked up the book which lay on the sofa.

“French, I see by the yellow cover.” She began to turn over the
leaves, and suddenly laughed.

“How like you to have a rose-leaf for a book-marker! _I_ should put
in a hairpin, or something equally ugly. I wish I could read French
easily, then you would lend me all your books, wouldn’t you, Miss Page?”

“Not all of them,” returned Anne, smiling.

“Why not? I’m sure _you_ haven’t got stupid ideas about proper reading
for young girls, and all that sort of thing,” declared Sylvia,
petulantly.

“I’ve got ideas on the subject, stupid or otherwise. Tea, please Burks.
We’ll have it up here. And bring the pink tea-service. It goes so
nicely with this room,” she explained to Sylvia in parenthesis.

“Do tell me why you wouldn’t lend me all your novels?” the girl
persisted.

“Because certain books, my dear, are of no use to us till life makes
them intelligible. And life can only be learnt by living it.”

“I wish I’d lived it then,” protested Sylvia.

“Oh Sylvia, there’s time enough. Don’t wish that,” returned Miss Page,
quickly. She bent forward and took the girl’s hand. “Don’t wish your
youth away. It goes so fast in any case. And it should be the most
beautiful part of one’s life.”

“_Should be!_” replied Sylvia, passionately. “But is it? What’s the
good of my youth to me, here in this dull little hole? I’d give
the world to be like you, Miss Page. You’re not--not quite young,
perhaps----”

“My dear, I’m almost an old woman.”

Her smile was wistful, though it was touched with amusement.

“You’ll never be that!” returned Sylvia, vehemently. “And anyhow,
you’re lovely, and every one adores you. And you lead your own life
and make it beautiful. And I’m perfectly certain that you _have_ had
everything I want. Except that you’re not married. I suppose I shall
want to be married some time or other. But, then, as you didn’t marry
it must have been because you didn’t want to. Hundreds of men must have
been dying to marry you. I’m sure hundreds are dying now----”

“What an awful picture of carnage!” interrupted Anne, laughing, as
Burks appeared with the tea.

“What a _lovely_ tea-service!” Sylvia exclaimed, taking up one of the
Sèvres cups gently to examine it. “But then everything of yours is
lovely. This room is as perfect as the drawing-room, and I think I like
it almost better. I love the white matting on the floor, and these
green-and-white chair-covers and curtains. And I love a room lined with
books. What a lot!”

She began to walk round examining them. “But heaps of them are French
ones, so you needn’t be afraid,” she added mischievously. “Oh, and
Italian too! Do you read Italian, Miss Page? Really? I ought to be
afraid of you. You’re so awfully clever. I believe you keep everything
you love best up here, don’t you? The pictures now--I don’t understand
pictures, but I like the colour of these. This room seems more _you_
than all the rest of the house. Though it’s all like you in a way.”

“I only receive my _special_ visitors up here.”

Anne’s smile flattered and touched the girl.

She slipped down on to the sofa beside her friend, and moved close to
her with a caressing movement, as she took the tea-cup from her hand.

“These cakes were baked expressly for you, so you must do them justice.
Really cook makes them very prettily, doesn’t she? They’re rather like
the cakes in _Goblin Market_. Do you remember how the sisters

    ‘_Kneaded cakes of whitest wheat,
     Cakes for dainty mouths to eat?_’”

She passed them to Sylvia in their silver basket, over the rim of which
fell a d’oyley of fine lace and linen.

Sylvia shook her head. “I don’t know anything!” she exclaimed. “I shall
never know anything if I stay here. Oh Miss Page, _do_ help me to get
away! You can do anything with father. Please persuade him that I ought
to go. You know how it is at home. I’m not really wanted. We’re quite
comfortably off, and there are enough servants to do the work without
_making_ work for me, to try to keep me quiet when I’m aching to go and
make my own life!”

She pushed her cup away from her with an impatient movement.

Anne waited a moment. “It’s still the music, I suppose?”

“Yes. I _have_ got a voice. I know I could do something with it. And
you see they don’t understand. Mother says I can take lessons from Miss
Rowe at Dorminster. _Miss Rowe!_” She laughed derisively. “And father
says if I sing well enough to please them at home, and to lead in the
choir, what more do I want? They expect me to trot round with mother
on her district calls, when I’m really only in the way. Mother _likes_
doing it. She wouldn’t give up her work to me even if I wished it.
And I’m supposed to do needlework for the children, when poor Mrs.
Jones down the village would be glad of it, and ought to have it. And
they think I’m awful and ungrateful not to be quite happy with tennis
parties and flower shows for my amusement! Oh Miss Page, don’t you
think to be a daughter at home, with no money, at the mercy of your
parents, unable to get away, is just like being a slave?”

She poured out the words passionately. Her hands were shaking, her eyes
full of tears.

Anne looked at her, and a wave of comprehension and pity passed over
her heart.

The girl’s incoherent words were echoes; they touched painful memories
of years for her, long past.

She recognized the despairing cry of youth, articulate in these modern
times, no longer stifled as in the days of her own girlhood.

Youth, fettered, struggling with passionate clamour to be free.

She recognized the revolt of a temperament unsuited to its environment,
bound by a tyranny no less stifling because it was unconscious and even
loving.

She rose, and began to walk about the room, conscious of the modern
spirit, accepting it as inevitable, and in spite of all the misery it
involved, right in its essence, a necessary step towards the just claim
for individual liberty.

Sylvia watched her hungrily, like a prisoner who has staked his
existence on the goodwill and clemency of a ruler.

“I will do what I can, Sylvia,” she said at last. “I will speak to your
father. I think you ought to go.”

The girl’s face grew radiant. “Oh, you’re an _angel_!” she cried. “What
should I do without you? Speak to him soon, Miss Page!” she implored.
“I can’t bear it any longer. I really can’t. I get on so badly with
father now, and with mother too. I can’t help it. I know I’ve got an
awful temper, but they irritate me so, and----”

Anne sat down beside her on the sofa. “I will speak to your father,”
she repeated. “But, my dear, I know it’s a hard, perhaps almost an
impossible thing to ask you, but try to see your parents’ point of view
as well as your own. They _have_ one, you know,” she added, smiling.
“One that belongs to their age and the traditions of their education.
To them, though you don’t believe it, their standpoint is as important
as yours to you.”

“But you think mine is right?” demanded Sylvia, breathlessly.

Miss Page laughed. “For you, yes. But I’m sorry for your people.”

“I believe you’re sorry for every one,” said Sylvia, after a pause.

“There’s a tendency to get sorrier for most people as one gets older, I
admit. You must bear with me, Sylvia.”

The girl flushed. “Now you’re laughing at me,” she said.

“No. Only remembering how I felt at your age, and being very sorry for
you too.”

“Ought I to see every one’s point of view as you do?”

“You couldn’t. It’s not to be expected of you. And after all, it’s
right that you shouldn’t. It’s the young who make history, and history
is made by seeing one thing at a time to the exclusion of every other
consideration. It’s only in the autumn of life that one has time to be
sorry. But still my dear, you can be kind even without comprehension.
Remember the immortal remark that our parents are fellow-creatures
after all.”

She looked at the girl whimsically, and Sylvia laughed.

“How angry father would be to hear you say that!” she cried. “But you
wouldn’t say it to him, of course,” she added.

“You know it’s only nonsense; and there’s such a thing as tact, my
dear.”

“I know,” sighed Sylvia. “I haven’t got any.”

“That’s another of the things that comes with age.”

“All the nice things come with age, I believe.”

“Well, age should have _some_ compensations,” returned Anne, gaily.

“You have _all_ of them,” Sylvia declared. “All the pretty things that
generally belong to girls, and all the interesting things that ought to
belong to women. It isn’t fair. You know how to talk to every one. I
should _love_ to hear what you say to father. It would be too amusing!
Mrs. Dakin came in this morning, and said you were wonderful with the
Frenchman who dined here last night. And the way you talk to Dr. Dakin
is quite different from the way you talk to father. And of course,
you’re quite different with me again. You always remind me of that
verse in the Bible about being all things to all men!”

“You’re really a terrible young woman!” was Miss Page’s reply. “Go and
sing me something. It’s the only way to stop you from proving me a
monster of duplicity.”

“No, no,” urged Sylvia, eagerly. “You only speak to people as they
can understand. But the wonderful thing is, that you know by instinct
exactly what they _will_ understand, and exactly how to say it.”

“Go and sing,” repeated Anne.

Sylvia went laughing to the piano. “I feel awfully happy. I must think
of something that suits.”

She considered a moment, and then broke into a gay little love-song,
with a charming refrain.

Anne listened, and as she listened, her determination grew. Sylvia was
right. She must go. Her voice was worth cultivating, even at the price
of parental displeasure.

“Thank you dear,” she said as the clear, ringing notes ceased. “I feel
as though a nightingale with brains had been kind enough to fly into my
room.”

“What else would you like?” Sylvia turned her head as she sat at the
piano, playing rippling notes with her left hand. The cloud had left
her face, and her parted red lips were very sweet.

Anne hesitated a moment. “You read music easily, don’t you? I wonder
whether you could sing me a little French song?”

She got up, and opening a cupboard in the wall, began to turn over some
papers.

“Here it is,” she said at last.

Sylvia left her place, and knelt beside her friends chair, taking the
music from her hand.

There were some words upon the cover, but they were in French, and in a
difficult handwriting.

Anne opened the page rather quickly. “You see it’s quite short and
quite simple,” she observed.

“Let me read the words first, and you must correct my pronunciation.”

She began to say the lines a little falteringly, but her quick ear soon
found their lilt, and she read them well.

“How pretty! They’re quite easy words. I can understand them,” she
said, going to the piano again. “Who wrote them?”

Anne did not answer, and Sylvia, engrossed in trying the accompaniment,
forgot her question.

“I see how it goes!” she exclaimed, playing the first bars.
Involuntarily, as she began the first bar, Miss Page put out a quick
hand as though to stop her, but the girl sang on unconsciously, and the
hand dropped at her side.

“It’s lovely!” Sylvia cried, playing the last notes softly over again.

“Thank you, dear,” said Anne, gently. She had crossed the room, and
was trying on her garden hat.

With one hand she gathered up the folds of her long gown.

“The sun is off the roses now, and I’m going to give you some to take
home to your mother. Come out and help me pick them.”




V


Dr. Dakin’s house stood in the village street. It was a plain Georgian
dwelling of a type common to every English country town; a type which
admirably combines comfort with a certain homely dignity.

It was covered with ivy, carefully trimmed where the rows of
square-paned windows broke the front, and its long, narrow door was
surmounted by the conventional classic design of skulls and garlands.

As Miss Page crossed the road towards the post-office one morning late
in September, Mrs. Dakin tapped at the window of the breakfast-room,
and then ran to the door.

Anne smiled as she crossed the threshold. “Why, Madge, what is it? You
look radiant, my dear!”

“I am. I mean I feel radiant. Come in. Do come in. I want to tell you.”

Her voice shook with suppressed excitement, as Anne followed her across
the stone-flagged hall to a room on the right.

“I’m going to Paris for a long visit!” she exclaimed, drawing up a
chair for her friend close to the window. “What do you think of that?”

“I didn’t know you had friends in Paris.”

“Oh yes. Didn’t I ever tell you about Helen Didier? She was one of my
school-fellows at the convent near Tours, where I went for a year. She
married a Frenchman.”

“And she lives in Paris?”

“Yes. I haven’t seen her for ages--scarcely once since we both married.
But I took it into my head to write to her a week or two ago, and just
fancy! You’ll be awfully interested. She knows Monsieur Fontenelle
quite well. Her husband is a friend of his.”

Anne looked up rather quickly. “Really?”

“Yes. Isn’t it strange? I happened to mention him when I wrote to her,
and she knew all about him. She would, naturally, as he’s such a great
man; but it’s awfully exciting that he should be a friend, isn’t it?”

“What does Harry say?” asked Anne.

“Oh, he doesn’t mind. He says it will do me good to have a change.”

“He will miss you horribly, my dear.”

She shrugged her shoulders. “He’s so busy, you know. And when he’s at
home, he’s always buried in his books. Besides, he knows I must have a
change. My nerves get worse and worse, and I’m always having neuralgia.
I sleep badly, too.”

“You mustn’t look so brilliant, then,” returned Anne, laughing. “You’ll
be considered a fraud.”

“It’s nothing but joy,” Madge declared. “You know I’ve never been to
Paris. And just think of getting out of this hole for two or three
months, perhaps. I could scream with excitement at the bare idea!”

“When do you go?”

“Next month. I shall be awfully interested to meet Monsieur Fontenelle
again,” she added. “He’s so clever, isn’t he? I’m rather afraid of him.
I envy you for getting on with him so well.”

Anne smiled.

“Why has he never been to see you before?”

“He’s not often in England now, though he travels a great deal, and is
very cosmopolitan.”

“How on earth has he learnt to speak English so perfectly?”

“He has English relations--Lady Farringchurch is one of them. And as a
young man he studied over here with a friend. But in any case he’s a
wonderful linguist naturally.”

“What interesting people you must have met!” exclaimed Madge, looking
rather curiously at her visitor. “I suppose you met him during all
those years you were travelling? I often wonder how you stand this
miserable little dead-and-alive place. You must have had such an
exciting life.”

Anne did not reply for a moment.

“My dear,” she said at last quietly, “when you come to my age, your
garden, your books, and your friends make a very pleasant haven before
you set sail.”

“And your memories, I suppose?” Madge glanced again swiftly at her
friend.

“And your memories--yes,” Anne repeated.

“I shall have none,” declared Madge, restlessly. “None that count.”

Miss Page was silent. “Oh! I know you think me an ungrateful wretch!”
she broke out, leaning back in her chair and tapping her foot
impatiently. “Harry’s very good and all that. But I’m so _bored_.
I’m bored from morning till night. When I get up every morning I
think--‘Here’s another dull day, what on earth shall I do with it?’ And
sometimes it doesn’t seem worth while to get up and go on.”

Anne watched her as she stared moodily into the narrow trim garden,
discontent and listlessness plainly expressed by her eyes and drooping
mouth.

She was a woman loved faithfully and with infinite tenderness. If
she had allowed them expression, Anne’s reflection would have been
translated by a smile and a sigh, both of them utterly unintelligible
to the little woman at her side. Both of them were therefore repressed.

“Well!” she said aloud. “I hope you’ll have a very gay time. I’m very
glad for you, my dear. Go and be happy. Where does your friend live?”

“Over by the Parc Monceau, wherever that is. _Do_ tell me what it’s
like?” she begged, all animation again.

Anne stayed a few minutes longer, talking about Paris, and then rose to
go.

Mrs. Dakin kissed her affectionately. “I wish you were going with me. I
shall miss you horribly!” she declared.

She followed Anne to the door, and stood a moment, waving and smiling
as her friend crossed the street.

All the bored discontent had vanished from her face, and her husband,
who at the moment drove up in his car, thought she had never looked
prettier.

The reflection was accompanied by a curious dull pain at his heart, a
pain to which he was well accustomed.

“I’ll drive you home,” he called to Miss Page, stopping his car at the
opposite pavement.

“So Madge is going to Paris?” she said, as they swept off.

“Yes. I hope it will do her good,” he returned shortly. “She complains
of neuralgia. Perhaps a change will set that right. I hear the little
Carfax girl is going to London to study this autumn?” he added after a
moment. “She’s off her head with delight about it. That’s _your_ doing,
of course.”

“Well, I suggested it to her father,” Anne admitted.

He laughed. “We all know your suggestions. When a witch ‘suggests,’
mere man is instantly hypnotized. Poor old Carfax can do nothing now,
but put his hand in his pocket and produce the necessary fees.”

Anne smiled. “Come in and look at my hollyhocks,” she said, as they
turned into the drive. “They’re really worth seeing.”

The doctor followed her through the house and across the lawn into one
of the walled gardens. “How gorgeous!” he exclaimed, as she opened the
gate.

The enclosure was a blaze of colour. Wine-red, white faintly flushed
with pink, yellow soft as a sunset sky, the flowers stood close
together in stately rows.

Behind them, on either side of the dividing grass path, masses of
phlox, white and rose and crimson, continued the wave of colour till it
was arrested by the enclosing walls.

“Look at the butterflies,” said the doctor, instinctively lowering his
voice as though he feared to disturb them.

They hovered in numbers above the silken cups of the hollyhocks. On the
sulphur-coloured petals of one of them, a Purple Emperor, motionless,
extended his splendid wings. Here and there, dazzling in fairy armour
of peacock-blue and sheen of silver, darted a dragon-fly.

“The colour of the thing is intoxicating,” murmured Dr. Dakin.

“It reminded me this morning of an elaborately arranged ‘sensation’
scheme, planned by that madman in _À Rebours_. Only of course, he would
have despised such a homely natural flower as the hollyhock.”

The doctor smiled. “What a curious anomaly you are here, my dear lady!”
he declared suddenly. “And yet that’s not true either, because you also
suit the place to perfection. Huysmans, and a country practice, and
Carfax--and you! It’s an amazing world. I hope some intelligent Being
doesn’t miss the exquisite humour of many human juxtapositions,” he
added rather drily.

“I’m glad Sylvia’s going to study,” was Miss Page’s somewhat irrelevant
reply. “She has a beautiful voice.”

“Quite remarkable,” he agreed. “She’ll be a difficult young woman
though, if that face of hers means anything. I don’t know that you
haven’t thrown her to the lions.”

“My dear doctor, isn’t it better to meet the lions, and take one’s
chance, than to be preyed upon by restlessness and discontent till the
whole of one’s character is worm-eaten?” asked Anne, quietly.

The doctor stooped to examine the Purple Emperor which still lay
motionless, basking in the sunshine.

When he raised his head Anne saw the trouble in his eyes.

“Perhaps you’re right,” he said. Then abruptly, after a moment, “I wish
I could give Madge the life that would suit her!” he exclaimed, jerking
out the words awkwardly.

Miss Page waited a moment. “What do you think _would_ suit her?” she
asked gently.

The doctor shrugged his shoulders. “She wants to live in London, you
know. She wants a gayer life. But I should be no use in town. I
shouldn’t make a living even. I haven’t the manner. It’s as much as I
can do to hold my own here.”

“Every one who knows you, ends by being thankful to find a splendid
friend as well as an excellent doctor,” returned Anne.

The bitterness in his face softened. “If all the world were like you,”
he began with a little laugh, and paused. “I’m glad they’re not,
though. There must only be one Miss Page. But that’s it,” he went on,
“I must know people well--better than one could ever know them in the
rush of a London practice, where the polished manner I don’t possess is
absolutely necessary.”

There was a silence, while they walked the length of the grass path
together.

“I ought never to have married Madge,” he broke out at last, in a low
voice. “She’s too pretty, and too gay by nature, for a slow coach like
me. This village life is too dull for her. She wants her dances, her
theatres”--he made a vague gesture--“all that sort of thing. I can’t
make her happy.”

There was a note of sad discouragement in his voice which went to his
listener’s heart.

“I think you could,” she said.

He turned his head sharply. “How?” The involuntary hope died. He shook
his head. “She’s bored with me.”

“Partly I think, because she imagines you are bored with her.”

He started. “_I?_ Bored with Madge?” He stopped, as though suddenly
arrested, and stood staring down at the grass. “I--I don’t think you
understand how much I--care for Madge. She’s the only woman I ever
wanted to marry. I----”

His voice failed. Miss Page saw that his face was working.

“I _do_ know. Better than any one, perhaps. But I don’t think you
understand her.”

He looked at her mutely, waiting for her next words.

“You think of her as a butterfly, don’t you? A woman with no brains,
perhaps? Oh! I know,” she interrupted, as he made a gesture of protest.
“I know that would make no difference.” She smiled a little. “A man
doesn’t want the woman he loves to have brains. But they are useful
sometimes. In her case they may be very useful. She would like a life
of gaiety, of course. She’s young and pretty, and it’s only natural.
But she can’t have it. Very well then, if she were nothing but a
butterfly, her lot--and yours, would be hard. But Madge has a mind.
Oh, she’s ignorant, of course! She says so herself. She never reads.
She never thinks. But that’s habit. No one has ever taken any trouble
with her. Did you notice how interested she was the evening we were
really talking--the evening Monsieur Fontenelle dined here? She was
proud of you then. She wished she could take part in the conversation.
Her mind is empty because she has never troubled to fill it. But it’s a
mind of good quality. She has the power to be interested in a thousand
things. You could open a new world to her, if you were careful--and had
a little tact. And we all know that you possess that admirable quality!”

The flattery of her smile was not lost upon the doctor.

Surprise, involuntary hope, gratitude, admiration, all struggled in the
look with which he regarded her.

“You always say the right thing,” he declared simply. “I didn’t know
the child----” He paused, but there was a look of sudden tenderness in
his eyes. “Well! she’s going away now,” he began.

“And that’s such a good thing,” interrupted Miss Page, eagerly. “She
will hear and see so much to interest her. She will come back with new
impressions. You will have something to work on.”

They strolled out of the garden together, and across the lawn without
speaking.

“Good-bye,” said the doctor, starting as though from a deep reverie, as
he found himself opposite his car.

He pressed her hand warmly. “You have made me much happier,” he added
shyly.

“But don’t forget to tell her very often that you love her, and that
she’s the prettiest thing in the world!” Miss Page admonished him, with
a laugh. “There are remarks which never bore a woman, however many
times they are repeated. Those are two of them.”




VI


The midday post had come while Miss Page and the doctor talked in the
garden.

As she passed through the hall after the motor-car had disappeared,
Anne found her letters lying upon the table.

She turned them over, and lighted with satisfaction upon one with a
foreign postmark.

Her correspondence with François Fontenelle--a correspondence of
fifteen years’ duration--had never ceased to be a pleasure to her.

She picked up his letter, and went through the inner hall into the
garden, to the seat under the beech tree.

Several things on the first page made her laugh. François was evidently
in a gay mood when he wrote. He had more work with portraits than he
could get through. He described his sitters with the light raillery
he managed so well, presenting them to his reader with a felicity of
phrase, a touch as skilful and clever as she well knew the portraits
themselves must possess.

It was better to be François Fontenelle’s friend than his enemy, Miss
Page reflected, and smiled to remember the rash women who now crowded
to his studio, anxious to be painted by the popular if distinguished
artist.

She guessed how many of them winced in secret at the result, and
marvelled that fashion, as well as religion, should exact its willing
martyrs.

“_I hear_,” he said towards the end of the letter, “_that I’m likely
to renew my acquaintance with your little friend, Mrs. Dakin. By a
strange chance, the wife of a friend of mine, Louis Didier, knew her
as a school-girl--went to school with her, I think; and she has been
asked to visit them. Louis Didier is a good fellow--an architect. No.
You never met him. I have known him myself only two or three years.
He belongs to the younger generation. C’est un bon garçon, though his
work is mediocre enough. I don’t like his wife. I suspect her of being
what you in England call a cat, though to me she is amiable enough. I
may possibly have struck terror into her feline heart. When you are in
Rome I want you to go again to the Farnesina Palace, and look at the
Correggio. You know the one I mean?_” The letter ended with talk about
pictures.

Anne read it to the last word, and then sat with it still unfolded
in her lap. Her eyes were fixed on the drooping branches of the beech
under which she sat.

Its leaves were already yellow, and it rose like a fountain of gold
towards the quiet September sky. All round the eaves of the house
the swallows were skimming and crying, in the unrest of an imminent
parting, and the hazy sunshine wrapped the garden in a dream of peace.

Anne too, sat dreaming. Ever since the visit of her friend, earlier in
the summer, her thoughts had developed a tendency to wander back over
the years before their meeting.

To-day it was of her first five years at Fairholme Court that she was
thinking.

She remembered driving up to the house that was now her home.

She remembered walking through the hall into the drawing-room,
distressfully conscious, even through her shyness, of the desecrated
stateliness of a dwelling meant for beauty.

True, she would not in those days have known with what to replace the
gaudy Axminster carpet in the hall, nor the arsenic green curtains at
the drawing-room windows. But little as she had seen, little as she
then knew of material loveliness, the right instinct she possessed for
form and colour was outraged at every turn by the indications at once
trivial and ponderous of Mid-Victorian taste.

As she entered the drawing-room, Mrs. Burbage rose from the sofa on
which she had been lying, a woollen rug of rainbow hues thrown across
her feet.

She was a little old woman with grey, corkscrew curls hanging in
bunches over her ears, keen eyes, and a mouth which combined shrewdness
and suspicion.

She looked Anne up and down with a penetrating glance.

“I didn’t think you would have grown so tall,” she remarked. “You were
a little creature when I last saw you. Ring for tea, my dear, and then
I dare say you would like to go to your room. Parker will show you.
Make yourself at home, and amuse yourself in your own way, if you can
find anything to do in this dull place. I don’t want you to think you
need trouble about running after me, unless I ask for you. I hate fuss.
There will be time enough for that when I get worse.”

The words struck the keynote of the future relationship between the two
women.

Even at that time Anne’s benefactress was a semi-invalid who did not
rise till noon, and usually spent the rest of the day on the sofa,
knitting interminably. Her illness, not at first severe, made any
but the slightest attention unnecessary. She was a woman a little
eccentric, often difficult in temper, but never exacting in trifles.

Her great abhorrence was what she called “fuss” of any sort, and as she
frequently preferred to be alone, she left Anne for the most part free.

Her duties gradually became those of general supervision of the
household, which composed as it was of elderly well-trained servants,
proved no arduous task.

Few callers came to the house. There was never anything in the nature
of entertainment at Fairholme Court. The days went on. Monotonously,
peacefully, spring glided into summer, summer to autumn; the winters
came and went.

A good understanding, a quiet comradeship was gradually established
between the old woman and her companion, who moved so gently, whose
voice was so soothing, who was always at hand when she happened to be
wanted--never in the way when her presence was not required.

Anne practically led her own isolated life. Too shy to make any
advances, the people of her own grade in the village, from the outset,
ignored the companion of a woman who had never been popular. She was
just a quiet, harmless creature, lady-like certainly, but very dull,
whom they occasionally pitied for being shut up with “that disagreeable
Mrs. Burbage.”

Anne found the bedroom she had loved as a child, now her own, almost
unchanged. The rosebuds on the wall were faded certainly, but the
dimity valance at the window, the white curtains to the bed were fresh
and spotless, and the “spindly” furniture remained. The white roses had
grown much taller. They clambered round the window now, and far above
her head, looked down at her as she opened it in the morning.

The library was also unaltered, and in this room, and in the garden,
Anne found all the joy of her life.

She was permitted to do what she liked with the garden, and, under the
direction of the old gardener, who rejoiced to find some one who loved
the work, and, delighted in its results, Anne planned and planted and
laid the foundation for the beauty that now surrounded her. The hours
in the open air restored her health. Insensibly, she grew strong and
straight. Her always graceful figure developed, and though it was
marred by the ill-cut gowns of the village dressmaker, she carried it
superbly.

Through the long winter days, the library was her solace and delight.
At first, imperfectly educated as she was, unused to reading, owing
to lack of time and lack of opportunity, she was bewildered by the
numberless books through which she was free to range.

But gradually she found her way; made a path for herself, and followed
it to find it leading her to distant prospects. Mr. Burbage, a gentle
and scholarly recluse with a catholic taste in literature, had left a
fine and widely representative library behind him, containing not only
the masterpieces of French as well as English prose and poetry, but
many curious and rare volumes dealing with the less frequented roads of
mental travel.

Anne found history, biography, philosophy, in sufficient quantities to
last her for a lifetime.

She found curious memoirs of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
as well as books on magic, on alchemy, on all the strange and recondite
studies which at various periods have exercised human thought.
French literature was well represented, and impelled by interest
and curiosity, Anne began to recall the little of the language she
had learnt with her governess as a child. In this endeavour she
unexpectedly found a ready teacher in Mrs. Burbage, who, educated in
a French convent up to the time of her marriage, spoke the language
fluently, and liked to speak it. Naturally gifted as a linguist, Anne
learnt quickly, and often from choice, as time went on, the two women
spoke French together, rather than English.

But it was to the English poets that Anne most often returned.
Poetry suited her nature. It was the form of art which to her, most
fully expressed the heights and depths, the beauty and the terror,
the haunting melancholy, the fear, the inexpressible longings, the
regrets, the sadness, the innocent delights of life, which, in all its
complexity, she had begun to recognize through the world of books.

In life, men went down to the sea in ships, and did business in
great waters. In life, there had been beautiful cities, in which a
many-coloured crowd of citizens and soldiers, of artists and thinkers,
had jostled and fought, and painted their thoughts in churches,
and on palace walls; built them into soaring towers, and mighty
cathedrals; woven them into immortal books, and lived them in schemes
for the regeneration of the world. In life, as Anne had come to
know it through her reading, there had been, and still were, fierce
passions of love and hate, swaying men and women as the trees of a
forest are swayed by a rushing wind. Passions which had given birth
to the great stories of the world--the stories of Helen of Troy, of
Abelard and Heloise, of Launcelot and Guinevere, of Romeo and Juliet.
In life, running like a dark mysterious stream, among the simpler
sensations, the more elemental passions of humanity, there had been
strange terrors, haunting curiosities, insatiable longings for the
unattainable, the unknowable, the unrealized--the desire of the moth
for the star.

In life too, there had always existed the fresh unspoiled delight in
Nature’s loveliness; in the charming natural embroidery of earth’s
garment. Delight in the simple things out of which, as her favourite
Herrick told her, he rejoiced to make his songs.

    “_I sing of Books, of Blossoms, Birds, and Bowers;
     Of April, May, of June, and July flowers----_”

In poetry, as in a mirror, Anne found the result of all her reading
reflected and transfigured.

It summed up for her all that she had learnt from other books, of love
and life, and hope of immortality.

She began with Chaucer, and found him sweet and fresh and hardy as the
hawthorn blossom with which he powders his English meadows. She found
in him all the simple and tender emotions which have existed in the
heart of man since he became human. The love of Custance for her child
delighted her.

    “Pees litel sone, I wol do thee no harm:
     With that hire couverchief of hire hed she braid,
     And over his litel eyen she it laid.

           *       *       *       *       *

     O litel child, alas! what is thy gilt
     That never wroughtest sinne as yet parde?”

The gentle, natural words, written five hundred years ago, went to
her heart. She loved the gaiety, the bustle, the gossip, the sense of
colour and vitality in that long procession which wound from the Tabard
Inn, along the white roads full of sunshine, which led to Canterbury.

She read the ballads which like vivid lightning flashes illumine the
darkness of the Middle Ages, and show the mainsprings of human action
to be ever the old mainsprings of love and hate.

She came to the Elizabethan poets--to the period when England had
become “a nest of singing birds.” She found Spenser’s glorious
love-song, and the wonderful cry in which Marlowe’s Faust links one
great love-story to another.

    “Was this the face that launched a thousand ships
     And burnt the topless towers of Ilium?
     Sweet Helen, make me immortal with a kiss----”

She learnt to know so well that they haunted her thoughts like music,
the sonnets of Shakespeare, and the lyrics of all the “singing birds,”
Lodge and Peele and Nash, Ben Jonson and Campion, who, a musician in
every sense of the word, framed his “Ayres for one voyce with the Lute
or Violl,” so as “to couple words and notes lovingly together.” She
came to Milton, and the lighter poets of the Restoration, of whom her
love was given chiefly to Herrick. The poets of comparatively modern
times followed, and led her in due time to Keats and Shelley, who
revealed to her the modern note of unrest, and the troubling effect
on the human spirit, of beauty, whether revealed as to Keats in the
material world, or as to Shelley in the intangible world of ideas. With
these two poets, the library, formed in her old friend’s youth, paused
abruptly in its representations of English poetry.

Anne found no volume of Browning, nor of Tennyson, on the shelves.

In her friend’s day they were young, untried men, as in a still
greater degree, were Swinburne, Morris, and Meredith.

But without them, Anne, like Keats, had travelled in the realms of
gold, and the new planet that swam into her ken was the very world in
which for thirty years she had lived blind and a prisoner, ignorant of
its beauty, deaf to its calling voices.

It was of her five years of solitary reading that Anne was thinking as
she sat in the September sunshine with François’s letter open on her
lap.

She had read, she had thought. Imaginatively, she had entered into the
life of the great world outside her country home.

But of actual individual experience of one personal heart-beat, known
to thousands of men and women past and present, she was as ignorant at
thirty-five as she had been all through her quiet existence.

Like the Lady of Shalott, she sat weaving her tapestry of dreams before
a magic mirror in which the pageant of the world was nothing but a
reflection; a shadow-dance of figures, loving, hating, struggling;
pursuing brave adventures, triumphing or defeated, hopeful or
despairing.

Miss Page folded her letter, and replaced it slowly in its envelope.

It was the day for her class of village children, whom she taught to
sew, and to whom, while they wrestled with long seams, she read fairy
tales.

There was tea in the garden afterwards, and she had forgotten to tell
Burks to put out the strawberry jam.

She rose, and went into the house to repair the omission.




VII


“We shall have a very dull winter,” complained Mrs. Carfax, “with so
many of you away. Sylvia and Mrs. Dakin have gone already, and now you
are going to desert us. We shall feel quite lost.”

It was a damp afternoon in mid-October, and the wood-fire in Miss
Page’s drawing-room glowed cheerfully.

The tea-table was drawn up near its blaze, and Mrs. Carfax leant back
comfortably in the corner of the sofa, sipping her tea and eating hot
cakes appreciatively.

“So you’re going to Rome?” she continued. “We hoped as you didn’t go
away last year you had become reconciled to an English winter.”

“I didn’t mean to go,” confessed Anne. “I was very happy here last
year. But somehow this autumn I have begun to long for more sunshine. I
know we’ve had a lovely summer, and I ought to be content, but the rain
of the last fortnight has decided me.”

She glanced with a little shiver towards the drenched garden. The rain
had been too persistent to make much sweeping of leaves practicable,
and the grass was strewn with them, yellow, battered and rotting.

“Tell me about Sylvia!” she inquired. “I heard from her the other day,
but I dare say you have later news. She seems very happy.”

“Oh, she writes in excellent spirits, as of course she would, now she’s
got her own way.”

Mrs. Carfax’s expression was one of rather irritable displeasure,
and Anne’s inward reflections turned on that deplorable yet possibly
comprehensible antagonism which so frequently exists between children
and parents; the tie of blood so binding, yet so provocative of mutual
adverse criticism, involuntary irritation and impatience.

“Do you like the boarding-house?” she asked.

“Oh yes. Very nice. Her father and I took her there last week, you
know. I couldn’t be easy till I’d seen what sort of place she was in.
And men are no good at that sort of thing.” She helped herself to
another tea-cake.

“Oh yes,” she repeated, “it’s a very comfortable house; on the
Embankment, I think you call it. At any rate, it’s quite close to the
school where she takes her lessons. Sylvia shares a sitting-room with
Susie Villiers, one of her school-fellows who is studying at the Slade,
is it? I always forget the names of these places. It’s a house built on
purpose for students, I understand. _Most_ comfortable. Hot and cold
water on every floor, and bathrooms, and a beautiful dining-room. To my
mind it’s all _too_ luxurious. Everything is done nowadays, it seems to
me, to tempt young people from their homes.”

Mrs. Carfax gave an exasperated sigh.

“But Sylvia has a great gift, dear Mrs. Carfax,” pleaded Anne. “It
isn’t as though she leaves home to do nothing.”

“That’s what her father says now. He never used to. He always upheld
me in maintaining that the place of the eldest daughter is at home.
I don’t know what you could have said to change him so, Miss Page,
but ever since he talked to you about Sylvia, his cry is that it’s
sinful not to use the gifts with which God has endowed us. Men are so
inconsistent; and if they’re clergymen they always seem able to quote
some text to annoy you. I don’t mean to be profane, but sometimes I
have found the Bible most trying.”

Mrs. Carfax sighed again.

“She has a lovely voice. You will be proud of her one day,” declared
Miss Page, with her disarming smile.

“But what is she going to do with it? I would never consent to a child
of mine singing in public, with her name in newspapers, and on placards
and all that! It would break my heart.”

“Still you needn’t think of the future yet, need you? She has years of
training before her.”

“But if she’s not going to do anything with it, what a waste of money!”
exclaimed Mrs. Carfax, tragically. “I think it’s much better for girls
not to have gifts,” she added.

Miss Page was rather disposed to consider that her guest had uttered a
great truth.

Her reply however, was non-committal.

“Perhaps,” she said. “But if they _do_ possess them don’t you agree
with Mr. Carfax that it’s right to cultivate them? A gift of any sort
is such a worrying thing,” she added persuasively. “And if it’s allowed
to rust, it chiefly worries its possessor. Now that she’s doing what
she was born to do, Sylvia will be contented. I _don’t_ think it’s just
because she’s getting her own way that she’s happy. It’s deeper than
that. She’s satisfied because she’s fulfilling a need of her nature for
which she’s no more responsible than she is for the colour of her very
pretty eyes.”

Anne’s voice was so gentle, her smile so irresistible, that Mrs. Carfax
was visibly softened.

“At any rate I’m glad it’s not art she’s got a taste for,” she conceded.

To Mrs. Carfax, painting, to the exclusion of all the other activities
of the Muses, was art, as Miss Page understood.

“You wouldn’t like her to paint?”

“Oh landscapes and flowers, and that sort of thing is all right. A very
nice amusement. I’ve got lots of water-colour sketches I did as a girl,
and hand-painted screens, and sofa cushions too. But nowadays art is
such a shocking thing, isn’t it? I hear that Susie Villiers draws from
the nude, as they call it. To me, it’s a perfectly disgusting idea.
And they draw _men_, as well as women. Imagine a young girl having the
boldness to draw a man without his clothes!”

“Do have some of this toast before it gets cold,” urged Anne. “Oh!
while I think of it I wish you would tell me how to make that delicious
shortbread I tasted the last time I came to you.”

Mrs. Carfax, adroitly switched off the topic of art as she understood
it, was on firm ground now that culinary operations held the
conversational field.

She gave minute directions to which her friend listened with flattering
attention.

“I must write that down before I forget it,” said Anne, opening a
bureau to take from it her book of recipes.

“How beautifully orderly you are!” exclaimed her guest, glancing with
admiration at the packets of papers tied with ribbon, the piles of
little books which filled the pigeonholes. “What a pity you never
married. You would have made _such_ a good wife. The wives of to-day
are shocking housekeepers. Look at that flighty little Mrs. Dakin! The
doctor, poor man, must suffer a good deal. I doubt whether he ever gets
a decent meal. Don’t you think it’s very extraordinary of him to let
her go away for such a long visit as she proposes to make? I think that
kind of thing is a mistake, you know.”

Launched upon the stream of gossip for which she possessed a
considerable weakness, Mrs. Carfax shook her head portentously.

“He thinks it will be good for her health. She’s not very strong, is
she? And this place doesn’t suit her in the winter.”

“Oh! I don’t think there’s much the matter with her health,” answered
Mrs. Carfax with a touch of scorn. “She hasn’t anything else to think
of. She hasn’t enough to do, that’s what’s the matter with her. One or
two children would soon make her forget her ailments. Poor Dr. Dakin! I
_don’t_ think she’s very nice to him, do you? I often pity him.”

“But I’m quite sure they’re devoted to one another,” began Miss Page,
hailing with relief the entrance of the Vicar, who had called to fetch
his wife, and to bid their hostess farewell.

“Well, dear lady!” he exclaimed in his hearty voice. “So you’re off to
the land of perpetual sunshine to-morrow. Lucky woman! And Rome too, a
city which I have always had a great desire to visit. Most interesting.
Most interesting. But you leave us desolate.”

“How kind of you to come and say good-bye! My farewells this week have
made me quite sad,” declared Anne. “I hate last days.”

“We shall all miss you terribly. You leave a heart-broken community
behind you,” said the Vicar. “Poor Dakin is already bemoaning his fate,
bereft of his wife and of you. It’s a good thing Sylvia isn’t here, or
we should have had nothing but lamentations till the spring.”

“You all spoil me,” Anne said in a moved voice. “We have been talking
about Sylvia,” she went on rather hurriedly. “I’m so glad she’s happy.”

“Best thing for her. Quite the right thing!” declared the Vicar
emphatically. “I’m always telling my wife that gifts are ours as a
sacred trust. Moreover, when the girl comes back for the holidays and
so on, she will appreciate her home, and we shall all get on much
better in consequence. Girls as well as boys must find their own paths,
and make their own lives. To thwart them only leads to unnecessary
friction, and is after all unjust. Every girl should have her chance.”

If Miss Page smiled in secret to find the ideas she had implanted in
the Vicar’s mind so well assimilated that they re-appeared in the form
of original conviction, no trace of her amusement was visible.

“I’m sure Mrs. Carfax will find that you’re right,” was her remark, as
she smiled at the lady in question.

Mrs. Carfax kissed her affectionately. “Good-bye. I’m sure we’re
preventing you from looking after your packing,” she said.

“Good-bye,” echoed her husband, enclosing Anne’s frail hand in his
vigorous clasp. “Don’t let Sylvia bother you with too many letters. I
am convinced that I’ve done the right thing by the child in sticking to
my own ideas.”

He smiled the manly smile of self-confidence and wisdom denied to
women, and Miss Page, following her visitors to the hall-door, waved to
them as they went down the drive together.

       *       *       *       *       *

The amusement that she need no longer repress, was in her eyes, as she
went upstairs to her room; the gentle tolerant amusement of a woman old
enough to look at life with kindly sympathy for its absurdities, and
that charity without which the spectacle has a tendency to move to a
mirth as bitter and more cruel than anger.

She found Burks on her knees before a trunk, still engaged in packing.

“That will do, Burks. I’ll finish it myself,” she said. “You go down
and get your tea.”

After the maid had left, Anne opened the door which led from her
bedroom into her sitting-room, and examined the shelves with the idea
of choosing one or two favourite books to take with her on her journey.

The books in this room were chiefly modern, supplementing the library
downstairs.

She chose one or two French novels, and a little volume of Herrick,
which had found its way to the shelves mostly devoted to French
literature. Then she returned to the bedroom, which was already bright
with lamp and firelight.

She hesitated a moment, then went to the bureau, from which several
months before she had taken her old journal.

This time she sought for, and found another book. After adjusting the
spring, and locking the writing part of the piece of furniture, she
thrust this volume, without looking at it, deep into her nearly filled
trunk.




VIII


Anne always returned with pleasure to Rome, a city which she knew well,
and to which she was bound by many memories. She settled down happily
with her maid in the little hotel in the heart of the city, at which
she frequently stayed.

It had been chosen chiefly on account of the garden which her rooms
overlooked--one of those charming Roman gardens, full of orange-trees
in tubs, of oleanders, and of clambering vines.

A fountain splashed in the midst, and the sound of its falling water
was music in her ears.

The deep blue sky, the dazzling sunshine never ceased to fill her
with a sense of buoyancy and youth, and all her wanderings to distant
churches, to ruined temples; amongst pictures, and statues, were a
delight.

One morning, when she had tired herself by a long ramble through
the halls and corridors of the Vatican, she returned with the
determination to do nothing for the rest of the day, but read and be
lazy.

She went to her room after lunch, her mind filled with the beauty of
the Borgia rooms in which she had just lingered.

The ribbed ceilings, rich with the gorgeous colour of the emblems and
coats-of-arms of the princely house, the marble pavements, the lofty
windows, formed the empty frame into which her fancy painted pictures
of the scenes those rooms had beheld. She heard the rustle of dresses
stiff with gold and gems; she caught the backward glance of many a
face; the face of Isabella d’Este, of Beatrice, of Lucrezia, framed in
the golden hair she washed so frequently, and tended with such care.

    “_What’s become of all the gold
     Used to hang and brush their bosoms?_”

Browning’s words had come to Anne’s mind as she stood for a moment
alone in one of the ante-chambers, and glanced about her as though
expecting it to be full of ghosts.

She wondered how many of these golden-haired women had loved the
painted walls upon which her eyes now rested. Those wonderful frescoes
of Pinturicchio with their background of valley and mountain, and their
flower-starred meadows; their animals and birds, their fantastic
towers, their dainty figures, fanciful and charming as a fairy tale.

She hoped they had loved them, and praised the painter with their
sweetest smiles.

Outside in the garden, the fountain splashed in the sunshine, and
suddenly its melody was the melody of her own fountain in her own
English garden at home.

She thought of it lovingly, and planned a new hedge of briar-roses in
the sunny corner where the dovecote stood.

Gradually the memory of the garden filled her mind, and blotted out the
stately visions of palaces and princes.

It grew peopled with well-known figures, with men who twenty years ago
had walked with her across its green lawn, had sat with her under its
trees, laughing, talking, reading, sometimes, but rarely silent.

Presently she rose, and took from a locked drawer the book she had
brought from home, and till this moment, forgotten.

Sitting in the sunshine, with the splash of the fountain sounding in
her ears, Anne opened it.

    “_March 3._ Hugh came home last November to marry Alice,” were
    the first words that met her eyes.

    “They have taken a little furnished cottage by the sea, at St.
    Margaret’s Bay near Dover, and they want me to stay with them
    before they sail for New Zealand. Mrs. Burbage says of course I
    must go, and I start to-morrow to be with them for a fortnight.
    I long to see Hugh again, but I’m shy at the thought of meeting
    his wife. I have never seen her.”

Except for the mention of her return to Fairholme Court, there was
nothing written in the book from that date, till May of the same year,
and the painful colour crept into Anne’s face as she noticed this.

There was no need for written record. Clearly, as though she had
recently lived through the experience, she remembered that fortnight’s
visit.

She remembered getting out of the train at the wayside station, the
nearest station touched by the railroad, for St. Margaret’s Bay. Her
heart was beating rather fast. It was eighteen years since she had seen
Hugh. Should she recognize him? He would not know her. When he last
came home she was a girl of seventeen. The thought of her present age
struck her with a shock of dismay.

There were only two people on the platform. A big burly man, tall and
bearded, and beside him a girl in a white serge dress.

Hugh and his wife!

“I am Anne,” she stammered, going up to them.

Hugh put his arms round her with his old impulsive roughness, and then
held her away from him.

“Why, you’ve grown, Anne!” he cried gaily. “You were such a little
thing! So slight, I mean. Darling, this is Anne. Isn’t she a damned
fine woman?”

His old laugh rang out boyishly, as Anne turned shyly to his wife.

She was very small, very daintily made, very prettily dressed. Her
face, despite her twenty-five years, was still babyish with its large
blue eyes and rings of soft hair round a childish forehead. She took
her sister-in-law’s hand and smiled, but even then, Anne did not miss
the quick glance that scrutinized her quizzically from head to foot.

From that moment, she knew that for Alice she was merely a dowdily
dressed woman; an old maid, some one to be treated with patronizing
kindliness.

They drove from the station to the cottage, which was almost upon the
seashore.

“Hugh loves the sea. He can’t be happy away from it, can you, darling?”
Alice asked, slipping her hand into his, as they entered the little
parlour where tea was spread.

“Now Anne, tell us all about it!” exclaimed Hugh as they sat down.
“Bless my soul, it’s seventeen or eighteen years since I saw you. What
have you been doing all this time?”

A sudden paralyzing blankness fell upon Anne’s mind.

What had she been doing? For thirteen years after her brother’s last
departure, she had lived in the little house in Tufton Street, managing
the house work, anxiously counting her weekly allowance for fear that
with all her pains, both ends could not be made to meet. She had
nursed a hopeless invalid, and tried to bear his exacting temper with
patience. For the last five of the eighteen years she had read books,
and worked in the garden. There was nothing to tell them.

Instinctively she felt that to these people who belonged to practical
life, who lived and loved, who were in the mainstream of human
activity, her world of books meant nothing.

The colour rushed to her cheeks, and left them white.

“I--I have done nothing at all,” she stammered. “You know I have been
living with Mrs. Burbage for five years? She’s very kind. But she’s
almost an invalid, so we’re--we’re very quiet. Tell me about yourself,
Hugh. Things are always happening to you.”

“Well, _this_ has happened to me,” he returned with a laugh, slipping
his arm round his wife’s shoulder. “The best thing that ever happened
in my life.”

Alice drew close to him with a little nestling movement, and Anne
suddenly felt a sickening pain at her heart.

“Don’t be so silly, Hugh! Any one would think we were lovers,” she
declared, turning to her sister-in-law. “And we’ve been married ages.
Nearly four months.”

“Well, aren’t we lovers?” demanded Hugh, shaking her. “Answer me at
once. Aren’t we?”

She got up laughing, and kissed the top of his head.

“Of course we are. But don’t be silly!” she commanded. She blushed, but
her eyes were bright with happiness.

“Oh never mind Anne!” said Hugh. “She’s one of the family. She doesn’t
count.”

The light, kindly meant words caused Anne another strange pang. She
didn’t count. Of course she didn’t count. Why should she?

“How lovely the sea is!” she exclaimed hastily. “I can’t look at it
enough. You know I’ve only seen it once before.”

“Nonsense! How’s that?” asked Hugh, with the easy forgetfulness of a
man who does not realize the straitened life in which he never had a
part.

“I never went away,” said Anne, simply. “There was no money. Once
when I was a child, Miss Atkins took me for a day to Broadstairs. You
remember Miss Atkins?”

“Old Thomas? She was Anne’s governess, and exactly like a
tortoise-shell cat,” he explained turning to his wife. “Yes, what’s
become of her?”

“Dead,” said Anne. “She died ten years ago.”

“Poor old thing!” returned Hugh perfunctorily. “Darling, won’t you
show Anne her room, and then we can go for a walk before supper. Isn’t
it warm here!” he exclaimed, leaning from the open window. “It’s so
sheltered you see with the cliffs at the back. Make haste, Anne. We’ll
take you on to the downs, and show you the sea to your heart’s content.”

At supper the talk was all about Hugh. His past adventures, his future
prospects. He had worked hard, and was now partner of the promising
sheep farm in New Zealand, to which next month he proposed to return
with his wife.

“I tell Alice it won’t be a very gay existence for her. She doesn’t
look much like a farmers wife, does she?” He threw her an admiring
glance. “But she declares she won’t mind.”

“_You’ll_ be there,” was Alice’s only comment.

“Oh yes! And there are neighbours too. Very jolly people. And Bob
Holmes, that’s my partner, you know, Anne, is an awfully decent fellow.
You’ll like his wife, Alice. She’s such a cheery little woman. Oh! it’s
not so bad. And the climate’s splendid. Lord! how one misses the sun in
this damp misty old country!”

“It will be lovely. I’m longing to go,” Alice exclaimed.

“You see she’s only got an uncle and aunt to leave,” explained Hugh,
turning to his sister. “She’s a very lonely little person.”

“Not now,” said Alice, her voice full of content.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before she had been with them two days, Anne had found herself filled
with a passionate longing to return to her quiet home. To get back to
the shelter in which she was not reminded twenty times an hour that she
“didn’t count.”

She was amazed at the violence of her own emotions.

Every glance exchanged by the married lovers, every word of love, every
caress, stabbed her afresh.

She had never before known what it was to feel acutely, and the
suffering bewildered her. She was afraid of it. She wanted desperately
to escape from herself, this new self which seemed all torn and
bleeding.

There was a hunted look in her eyes like that of a starving and
desperate animal. She shuddered at them sometimes when they met her
suddenly in the glass. One evening, unable to bear the sight of their
endearments, she had gone early to her room, pleading a headache. She
groped her way to the window, in the dark, and kneeling down beside it,
looked out upon the sea.

Every few minutes, a flash from the lighthouse on the cliffs
momentarily illumined the still water. Far out, lights moved on the
prow of passing ships. She could hear the wash and murmur of the waves,
as they broke lazily on the pebbly shore.

For a long time she knelt there immovable, the sound of the sea
lulling her into a sort of painless trance, till the hum of voices
below gradually filtered to her senses. The evening was so warm that
Hugh and his wife were sitting in the garden. At first, numbed and half
conscious in mind, she scarcely heeded the murmur of talk, but finally
a sentence in a man’s voice reached her consciousness.

“Nonsense, darling! She’s not at all bad looking. Well dressed, she’d
be a fine figure of a woman.”

“Why is she so dowdy then?”

“She lives in the country, you see. I suppose there’s no one to dress
for. And after all what does it matter?”

There was a little laugh. “No. She’s too old now. She’ll never marry.”

Again there was an incoherent murmur. “Yes I know, darling, it’s boring
for you. But she’s had a dreary life, poor girl. I want you to be nice
to her.”

“I _am_ nice,” the answer came in a hurt voice, and was followed
immediately by a rustle.

“I know you are. You’re a darling. You’re the sweetest thing on this
earth!”

There was a sound of a kiss, and Anne drew back from the window with a
quick movement.

“Hush!” The exclamation came swiftly from Hugh.

“Oh! it’s all right. Her light’s out. She’s asleep.”

Anne closed the window noiselessly to shut out the voices to which
she had listened without her will, scarcely conscious of how they had
reached her. She threw herself on her bed in the dark. After all, as
Hugh said, it didn’t matter. But she cried all night as though it did.

In the journal which Miss Page held open on her knee, she saw the date
of her return recorded.

“_Came back to Fairholme Court, March 17th._”

She remembered her old friend’s greeting, as she went to find her in
the morning-room, where she was lying on the sofa.

“Why, Anne! Sea air doesn’t suit you. You’ve got thin, my dear. You
look quite ill. You mustn’t go away again.”

“No,” she said quietly. “I will never go away again.”

She remembered going into the library before she took off her walking
things, looking round at the walls lined with books, and wondering why
they had ever meant anything to her at all.

“Books are no good,” she said to herself, as she went upstairs.

“This also is vanity,” was what the words implied.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Page looked out with a sort of surprise upon the garden steeped in
sunshine. The fountain was still splashing gaily into its marble basin.
In the blue overhead, two pigeons flashed and wheeled. She had been
living over again the life of many years ago, with such intensity of
vision and of feeling, that her present surroundings had the unreality
of a dream.

After a few moments, she turned the next page, knowing well what she
should find, yet curious to see the words in her own handwriting of
twenty years ago.

    “_May 15th.--We have had visitors to-day for the first time
    almost, since I have lived here. They were all men, too, and
    Frenchmen. The parents of one of them, Monsieur René Dampierre,
    knew Mrs. Burbage long ago, and he called and brought three
    friends with him._”

As Anne slowly turned the pages, isolated paragraphs met her eye.

    “_I felt horribly shy at first, but only for a little while.
    They were all so nice. I suppose Frenchmen have easier manners
    than Englishmen, though I have had no experience of either._”

    “_Monsieur Fontenelle is very amusing and clever. I like his
    face, though he looks sarcastic, and I’m sure he can say bitter
    things. But he never says them to me._”

    “_Mrs. Burbage wanted me to describe Monsieur Dampierre in
    whom she is chiefly interested, because she knew him when he
    was a child. I found it very difficult. When I had said that
    he was tall, and broad-shouldered, and very fair and handsome,
    it seemed as though I had said nothing. It’s his smile and his
    changing face which make up his personality--a very charming
    one._”

All through that summer there were short entries concerning the little
colony of Frenchmen that had settled in the village.

Anne glanced at them with a smile. It was a very sweet smile, scarcely
sad, scarcely regretful. It was the smile of content with which a woman
bends over a bowl of dried rose-leaves, and feels again the warmth of
the sun, and sees the glitter and the blueness of the day when the
leaves were red.




IX


It was grey and cheerless in Paris, while Anne sat in the sunshine of
Rome.

Winter had set in early, and in François’s studio the stove piled with
fuel was almost insufficient to warm the great room.

It was as he had suggested, the typical luxurious studio of a rich man.

A broad divan under the window, was piled with cushions, and supported
by them in an attitude suggestive of extreme comfort, François sat and
smoked while he talked to an old friend.

The Vicomte de Montmédy, rich now, through his marriage with an
American heiress, was a lover of the arts, a connoisseur and a buyer of
pictures.

Fontenelle had known him in the days when he was only a struggling and
unsuccessful painter.

His title and his noble birth, had stood him in better stead than his
talent. That this was of an inferior quality to his fine taste in art,
François had early recognized, and his felicitations on the subject of
his prudent marriage had therefore gained an added warmth and fervour
of approval.

The two men had been talking while the daylight waned, and when
François, finding his match-box empty, rose to refill it from a jar
on a side table, he paused to glance with a shiver upon the prospect
outside the window.

The studio looked upon the Luxembourg Gardens. The trees were bare now,
and their branches showed black and stiff against a wintry sky.

The paths underneath them, in summer gay as the flower beds, with
children and their nurses, were now lightly powdered with the first
fall of snow.

“I ought to have gone abroad,” he declared, lighting a cigarette. “If
it were not for these confounded commissions, I should be in Rome at
this moment. There’s no light here. It’s abominable!”

“Why Rome?” asked the Vicomte lazily.

“I love Rome. And then sweet Anne Page is there, and she’s always an
attraction.”

The other man looked up quickly. “By the way, it’s _her_ portrait the
Luxembourg has bought, isn’t it?”

“Yes.” He made a quick movement. “Good heavens man, it’s here, and I’ve
never shown it to you. I forgot you hadn’t seen it. It goes next week.
I kept it to do a little work on the background first.”

“Quick! Show me before the light goes,” urged his friend. “I was always
curious about it.”

François crossed the studio rapidly, and returned with a large canvas.

“The best thing I ever did in my life,” he said deliberately, as he
placed it on an easel in the middle of the room.

The Vicomte had risen, and in a silence that lasted for some time the
men stood before the picture.

“Charming!” he murmured at last. “Adorable! They’ve picked out the
right thing, _mon ami, hein_? The smile! How well one remembers it.
So sweet, and so shy. And that flowered gown. Admirable! It suggests
one of the Botticelli Madonnas. It might be a robe all sown with
stars. And the hair, that delicious soft hair that was no particular
colour--_couleur de miel_, perhaps.”

“Mistress Anne Page? She has brown hair, and speaks small, like a
woman,” quoted François softly.

“What’s that?”

“It’s Shakespeare. And it’s Anne Page,” he answered smiling.

“And the flowers! The great sheaf of flowers she’s carrying. They’re
English, and ‘sweet-Anne’ too.”

Fontenelle looked amused. “You always pronounced it like that,--as one
word!” he said.

“I used to think it _was_ one word. Just a Christian name; a lovely
name.”

He joined in his friend’s laugh.

“When did you do this?” he asked after a moment.

“Just before she went.”

“Was I away then?”

“You were just married. You had gone to America with your wife.”

“Yes. I stayed a year. But when I came back why didn’t you show it to
me?”

“I put it away. She wouldn’t accept it, and I didn’t want to see it,
after she had gone. I never looked at it again till last spring. Paul!
Do you know that picture’s been painted eighteen years, and I’ve never
done anything to touch it since? Encouraging, isn’t it? Something to
congratulate one’s self upon.”

The last words were accompanied by a bitter laugh. His friend was
silent.

“Here comes tea,” said François, with an abrupt change of voice.

His _femme de ménage_ entered with a tray which she placed on one of
the tables. She went out, and re-entered with the spirit lamp and
kettle.

“_Voilà, Monsieur!_”

François began to put the tea into the teapot.

“Antoinette brews it abominably; I always make it myself,” he remarked.

“This tea-habit dates from ‘Sweet Anne’s’ time, doesn’t it?” asked the
Vicomte.

“I believe it does. Do you remember the flat in the Rue Vaugirard? And
Anne pouring out tea on winter afternoons?”

Before the other man could answer, he turned to the picture again.

“I painted that as a sort of memory of the first day I saw her, in an
old English garden. Did I ever tell you how we four, the old four, you
know, first met Anne Page? _You_ only knew her here in Paris, when she
had learnt to dress, when she had learnt to talk, when she had grown
used to us and our ways. We saw her in her garden, when she knew no
one, when from year’s end to year’s end she spoke to no one but the
invalid old woman with whom she lived.”

“What were you four doing in her garden?” inquired the Vicomte, helping
himself to sugar.

“Well, René was in England. He was often there, visiting his
relations--his mother’s people.

“You know he was educated in England? Went to school there, to
Beaumont, and afterwards lived some time in London. René was an
Englishman with at least half his nature. And he loved England because
of his mother. Well, he wrote to me that year--to Thouret, Dacier and
me, to suggest that we should join him for the summer. He told us he’d
found a gorgeous village, where we could all paint and write, and go
on with our beastly art as much as we liked. We thought it wouldn’t be
bad, so we said all right, and packed up our traps and went.

“Have some more tea? Well, another cigarette?

“Dymfield is in Warwickshire, _mon cher_,” he went on, striking a
match, “and Warwickshire is Shakespeare’s county, and Anne Page is one
of Shakespeare’s women. So it was all as right as it could be.

“We put up at the inn. The Falcon it was called. Such a jolly old
place! Sixteenth century. Yawning fireplaces, beams, oak staircases,
walls a yard thick. You know the sort of thing.

“And the village! Thatched roofs all stained with moss. Oh, the colour
of those roofs! Cottage gardens full of hollyhocks and roses. Such a
church! If you’ve ever seen a really beautiful English village, you’ll
know what I’m talking about. Dymfield is one of them.”

“And how did you get to know Anne?”

“Well, René’s mother had been a friend of the rich woman of the place,
an old lady who no more deserved to possess Fairholme Court than she
deserved Anne as her companion.”

“Cantankerous?”

“I don’t know anything about her moral qualities. Her taste was
execrable. Anyhow René made his mother responsible for taking us to see
the place--a wonderful jumble of every style from the fifteenth century
downward. But beautiful! _Mon Dieu_, beautiful as a dream. And Fate was
kind. The old lady was ill in bed, and sweet Anne--I told you she was
her companion, didn’t I?--was forced to do the honours.”

François got up, and began to pace up and down the floor as he talked.

“We were all packed into the drawing-room to wait, the first time
we called, and while René was making absurd remarks about the sofa
cushions, and the bead mats, and the whole chamber of horrors, I
caught sight of Anne coming across the lawn.

“She wore that gown.” He nodded towards the portrait. “An absurd thing
really, but it suited her because it showed her figure.”

“Her figure was superb,” murmured the Vicomte.

“Yes.”

Fontenelle paused a moment. “Even at the time,” he said rather slowly,
“I wondered how she would strike René. Because she wasn’t really
beautiful, you know. Certainly not in those days. Only remarkable
looking, curious, and very sweet.”

“But he was struck too?”

“I remember he looked up suddenly, and said, ‘By Jove, who on earth is
this? It’s some garden goddess or other. Flora. Yes, that’s it,--Flora.
Good Lord, let’s run out and burn incense or something!’

“She had a heap of flowers, branches of lilac and hawthorn and things,
in one arm, supported against her hip, and with the other hand she held
her dress away from her feet. She was moving quickly across the grass.
You know how she walks?

“Then she came into the drawing-room, and we saw her curious face.”

“There it is!” said the Vicomte, with his eyes on the portrait. “You’ve
got it exactly. Something between a Botticelli Madonna and a pagan
goddess--Flora is admirable. But it’s the sort of face that it takes a
painter to admire.”

“She had been considered hideous all her life, of course. She thought
herself desperately plain. Even when we burnt incense,--and René at
once began to send it up in clouds,--she thought we were laughing at
her.” François laughed gently himself.

“You remember Anne? You know how she would take praise. Adorably, like
a little girl who is almost too shy to be pleased. It was absurd, of
course. She was by no means young even then, remember. But somehow that
only made it more piquante. Anne is one of the few women for whom age
is an absurd convention. Quite meaningless, quite beside the point. The
goddesses are immortal.”

“But there was nothing of the goddess about her nature,” objected his
friend.

“Good heavens, no! Except physically. She’s a mortal woman if ever
there was one. She’s just what she always was, sweet Anne Page.”

Twilight was creeping into the studio. The polished floor with its
costly rugs, the pictures on the walls, the outlines of cabinets and
tables, all were growing dim and indistinct. The last light from the
window above the men’s heads fell across the face of the portrait on
the easel. It looked down upon them gently with the wavering uncertain
smile in the eyes, and on the lips, red and soft as the petals of a
rose.

“René saw a great deal of her that summer, I suppose?” asked the
Vicomte, breaking a silence.

“We all did. The gods for their own inscrutable purposes had decided
Anne’s fate. The old lady got weaker and insisted upon having a
hospital nurse. She was in her room all day in bed, and Anne was bidden
to entertain us.

“When we were not in her garden, she was at the old barn which René and
I had rigged up as a studio.

“She amazed us all. Do you know those tightly shut buds on a rose-tree,
that you think will never open? And then the sun shines, and gradually,
very slowly, a little every day, they grow pinker and sweeter, till at
last they are roses?

“I think the sun came out for Anne that year, for the first time in her
life.

“We made her laugh. I don’t believe she had ever laughed before. And
we discovered that she had brains, and taste and understanding, and
_instinct_ for everything that fired our young brains. Instinct is the
word for Anne. It’s a sixth sense with her. The only sense it’s any
good for a woman to possess. The very sense that nowadays with their
education and their emancipation, and their ‘rights,’ women are doing
their best to kill.

“And she’d read, _mon cher_. Good heavens, what she’d read! The
modern English woman with her smattering of Latin and Greek, is an
ill-educated prig beside her. For five years she had been shut up in a
library, and I believe she had read everything worth reading in her own
literature, and much of ours too, for that matter. And I, who like René
am partly English by education at least, know what that means. It’s a
magnificent literature for those who have ears to hear, and a heart to
understand.”

He began to light one of the lamps, stooping over it as he talked.

“She used to read poetry to us sometimes. Thouret and Dacier knew very
little English then, but they could understand the simple things when
she read them. I can hear Thouret now, trying to say after her--

    “‘_I sing of times trans-shifting; and I write
      How Roses first came red, and Lilies white._’”

François laughed, as he mimicked the accent of his friend the novelist,
who since the days of which he talked, had attained an almost European
reputation.

“That’s Herrick. You don’t know him? Well, he’s an English
seventeenth-century poet, and he wrote on purpose for a woman as simple
and natural as Anne Page. She used to read him to us in an old walled
garden, where in June that year, the lilies were ‘coming white.’”

“And Dampierre?” asked the Vicomte. “I didn’t know Dampierre in those
days, remember. Tell me something about him.”

He spoke as one speaks of a great man who is dead, whose lightest word
is of importance to the admirers who survive him.

“René was twenty-seven then,” said François, slowly. “He was a year
younger than I. You know how he looked? He was like his mother. Quite
magnificent. Oh sometimes absurdly handsome, when the right mood
affected his face. He used to dress like an Englishman in those days,
in white flannels. When he and Anne walked together they were worth
looking at, I can tell you.”

“But she was, what was it? Seven--ten years older?”

“Yes. She remembered that,” returned François.

His companion glanced quickly in his direction. He had never heard
the whole story, and his curiosity was roused; but something in his
friend’s voice assured him that it would not be gratified.

He made a tentative effort, however, by a suggestion half seriously
offered.

“_Mon ami_, you were in love with her yourself.”

François echoed his light laugh. “No,” he declared. “No. My feeling
for her now is what it has always been. I have paid her the compliment
of thinking of her in a different way from every other woman I ever
met. And I’ve never arrived at defining that way to myself. An English
writer--I’m boring you to death with English writers to-day,--comes
nearest to it in his definition of religion. He says ‘_religion is
morality touched by emotion_.’

“Well, I believe what I have always felt for Anne Page is affectionate
morality,” he laughed again, “strict morality mind, touched with
emotion.”

“Have you seen her lately?”

“I saw her last June, for the first time in three or four years.”

“She’s altered, of course?”

“She has. She’s more beautiful. She’s really beautiful now, so that
even the turnip-headed people she lives among see and acknowledge it.”

“That’s rather wonderful.”

“You would think so, if you saw her with them. She’s the village
goddess and oracle. Giving to charities with both hands, petitioned
for advice and counsel, loved by every one, high and low. That’s not
surprising. Nor is it more surprising, I suppose, that she’s happy.
Her nature is essentially simple and maternal. She ought to have had
children and children’s children by now.”

He got up and switched on all the lights, revealing the spacious room,
and the beautiful things it contained; revealing also once more the
portrait on the easel.

The Vicomte again examined it. “The Luxembourg has made a good choice,”
he repeated. “It’s a beautiful thing, _mon cher_. Gracious, dignified,
sweet--but sad. In spite of the smile, because of it, I suppose,
profoundedly sad. But why? She was not, she is not a sad woman.”

François was moving about the room, rearranging the canvases against
the wall.

“She was sad then.”

The Vicomte waited, but François said no more, and the conversation
turned upon other matters.

As he rose to go, he stooped to examine a little sketch propped up on
the top of a cabinet, against the wall.

“That’s rather nice,” he remarked critically. “It’s the little woman I
met here the other day, isn’t it? Dark. Pretty. English. Who is she?”

“A Mrs. Dakin. By the way, she’s one of Anne Page’s friends. One of the
people in her village. She’s staying here with Madame Didier.”

“Louis Didier’s wife? Did they know her then?” asked his friend quickly.

“Who? Anne? No. It was all ages before their time. Louis has only been
in Paris five or six years.”

“So much the better. That woman’s a cat, _mon cher_. Sleek fur, claws
and all.”

“Madame Didier? I agree,” returned François with a laugh. “The typical
English devotee of Mrs. Grundy. Louis goes in mortal fear of her.”

“_Tant pis!_” exclaimed the Vicomte, with an accent of commiseration.




X


Towards the middle of December, Mrs. Carfax became possessed with the
idea of going to London.

Various circumstances had combined to render her projected visit
pleasurably fraught with interest.

There was shopping to be done, of course. There was also Sylvia to
embrace;--Sylvia whose holidays were so short that she herself had
suggested the advisability of staying in town for Christmas, in order
not to interrupt her work.

Naturally Mrs. Carfax was anxious to see her child. Naturally also she
looked forward to staying with the Lovells, who were old friends, and
had a comfortable house in Bayswater.

Then too, she had been deeply interested to hear that the niece who was
visiting Mrs. Lovell, was none other than the Madame Didier who had
invited Mrs. Dakin to Paris.

Mrs. Dakin had not yet returned to Dymfield, and it was natural and
neighbourly of Mrs. Carfax to feel as much interest in her protracted
absence, as that which palpitated in every Dymfield breast. In a few
days she would be in the position of knowing all that Madame Didier
knew about her late guest. And then there was Sylvia of course, and the
shopping, and the delight of meeting her dear friends the Lovells. Mrs.
Carfax was quite determined to go.

“I shall take the three o’clock train this afternoon,” she announced
to the Vicar at breakfast time, “and send a telegram to Laura. She is
quite ready for me, and urges me to come at once.”

“Very well, my dear,” agreed the Vicar. “Please yourself of course,
though I scarcely think it necessary. You were in town only three
months ago.”

“You don’t think it necessary to see Sylvia, who is not coming home
for Christmas?” demanded his wife. “Well, I do. I have the feelings of
a mother after all, and I think it’s cruel to leave the poor child up
there, with never the sight of a home face.”

“Please yourself, my dear, as I have already said. There seems to be a
spirit of great unrest working amongst us,” he went on, stirring his
second cup of coffee irritably. “There’s Miss Page abroad, and Sylvia
away, and Mrs. Dakin not yet returned. And now you----”

“Children, go upstairs if you’ve finished your breakfast,” interrupted
their mother. “Johnny, say grace. Now all of you go and get your
lessons ready for Miss Hope. She’ll be here in a minute.”

There was a stampede to the door, and when it closed on the last child,
Mrs. Carfax turned to her husband.

“It’s most extraordinary about Mrs. Dakin, isn’t it?” she exclaimed.
“And such a strange thing that this Madame Didier should be Major
Lovell’s niece. I heard something once about a niece of his having
married a Frenchman, but I never knew her name. I shall probably hear
all about Mrs. Dakin from her.”

“Then my dear Mary, if you do, I hope you will be discreet.”

“Discreet, George? What do you mean? Am I not always discreet?”

The Vicar prudently disregarded the question.

“What I wish to point out, is this,” he returned. “The duty of taking
broad and charitable views. There is a reasonable explanation of Mrs.
Dakin’s absence. I met Dakin yesterday, and he told me it was a
question of his wife’s health. She’s seeing some doctor in Paris, and
going through a course of treatment.”

Mrs. Carfax sniffed. “With her own husband a doctor!”

“My dear, you know as well as I do that doctors seldom attend their
wives.”

“You annoy me, George. You speak as though I should be glad to hear
that there was any other reason. I’m sure I hope with all my heart it’s
the true one. But everybody is talking about it, and I must say I think
the poor man looks very unhappy.”

“Broad views,” returned the Vicar, clearing his throat, “are those
which in Christian charity we should always endeavour to assume with
regard to our fellows. Let us remember also, that we have neither part
nor lot in this matter.”

“Why don’t you tell me straight out to mind my own business?” asked
Mrs. Carfax angrily. “It’s what you mean. And we’re not in church, so
you needn’t beat about the bush. You only take ‘broad views’ as you
call them, when you want to be annoying and put me in the wrong. You
know as well as I do that it’s not right for a wife to stay months away
from her husband. Dr. Dakin must be a fool to allow it. At the same
time, you know how delighted I should be if it _is_ all right. And yet
you pretend to think that in a spirit of vulgar curiosity I’m going up
to town on purpose to gossip and try to find out things which don’t
concern me! My object in going, as you know, is to see Sylvia----”

“And to do some shopping. Yes, my dear. Yes. You’ve said so many
times,” interrupted her husband, rising. “You’d better tell Mark to
bring the trap round at half-past two.”

The Vicar closed the breakfast-room door with a slightly firm touch.

“Is mamma going to London to-day?” shouted Johnny, who regardless of
lesson books, was sliding down the banisters outside.

“I believe so. I trust it may do her good,” answered his father
piously. “Go upstairs, at once, and get ready for Miss Hope.”

He entered his study, and with some disinclination, sat down to
the sermon for which a more deferential hearing might possibly be
anticipated than that accorded in the home circle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Carfax arrived at Rushworth Terrace just in time to dress for
dinner. Madame Didier, to whom she was presented in the drawing-room
just before the gong sounded, was a tall young woman of twenty-seven
or twenty-eight, with a sharp face and a thin pointed nose. Her fair
hair was arranged neatly over her forehead, and her dress, though
fashionable, was undistinguished.

“Helen doesn’t look a bit French, does she?” asked her aunt.

Mrs. Lovell was a fat comfortable woman with no figure, and less
intelligence.

“I’m glad she’s kept so English. One would have thought that living in
Paris so long would have made a Frenchwoman of her.”

“We should quarrel if it had!” declared the Major in a loud voice. “I
don’t like foreigners. Can’t stand ’em. Beg your pardon, my dear. I
forgot your husband!”

He laughed heartily. “But you must excuse me. I’ve never seen him, and
I dare say you’ve made an Englishman of him. Hope so, I’m sure.”

“Oh, nothing would make an Englishman of Louis, I’m sorry to say,”
answered Madame Didier. “He can’t bear England. We’re always fighting
about it.”

“Well, come along! Dinner. Dinner. I’m famished,” declared the Major.

“Come along, Mrs. Carfax. How’s your husband? And the children? All
well, eh? That’s right.”

“I’m so interested to hear that you know a neighbour of ours,” began
Mrs. Carfax during the first favourable opportunity at dinner-time.

“Oh! Madge Dakin? Yes. Aunt Laura has been telling me that you are
neighbours. She has been staying with us in Paris, as of course you
know.”

“Yes. I’m so sorry to hear she is ill.”

Mrs. Carfax helped herself to bread sauce, and waited in suspense.

“Madge is never quite so ill as she thinks she is,” replied Madame
Didier in her decisive voice. “It’s all a question of nerves with her.
However, I suggested she should go to a doctor who did me a great deal
of good some time ago. I’m a _real_ sufferer from nerves. And as I
couldn’t keep her any longer--I had visits to pay and so on,--she is
boarding with some people in Paris to go on with the treatment.”

The explanation, delivered in Madame Didier’s high thin voice,
seemed sufficiently reasonable. Yet Mrs. Carfax was conscious of an
under-current.

Her hostess was silent, but the Major, always garrulous, broke in with
one of his pet grievances which lasted till the end of the meal, and
ended by proving anew, through many ramifications, that the country was
going to the dogs.

In the drawing-room, when coffee was served after dinner, and her host
had gone to the smoking-room, circumstances for Mrs. Carfax were more
propitious.

Madame Didier took out her embroidery, and Mrs. Lovell lay back in an
easy-chair, and warmed her feet at the fire.

“Helen has been telling me a good deal about this Mrs. Dakin,” she
began.

Her tone suggested that further confidences might be expected from Mrs.
Dakin’s friend, and Mrs. Carfax sat upright in her chair, and leant
forward a little.

“Oh, but if Mrs. Carfax is a friend----” objected Madame Didier.

“Well, dear, so are you,” put in Mrs. Lovell, who, as Mrs. Carfax
suddenly decided, was really quite stupid.

Madame Didier’s offended expression might portend anything--even
silence.

Innocent of psychology, Mrs. Carfax could not be expected to know that
on this score, at least, she need have no apprehension.

“Of course I am Madge’s friend,” said Madame Didier, stitching very
fast, “and that’s why I am so distressed at her foolish behaviour.”

“What has she----?” Mrs. Carfax paused. It was perhaps safer not to
interrupt.

“Oh only that she rather annoyed me by flirting outrageously with a
man who sometimes comes to our house. A man I don’t like. But he’s
a friend of Louis’s, and so I have to put up with him. A Monsieur
Fontenelle.”

“Why, I met him last spring, at a dinner-party!” interrupted Mrs.
Carfax in surprise.

“So I heard.”

The brief words were enigmatic in tone, and Mrs. Carfax gave an
uncomprehending gasp.

“He’s a celebrated man, as of course you know. He was made President of
the International Art Congress this summer, here in London. And he’s
naturally a splendid painter. But he’s not a nice man. Few Frenchmen
are.”

Madame Didier shut her thin lips, and bent over her embroidery.

“You mean----?” began Mrs. Carfax timidly.

“If he were an Englishman, he would have a very bad reputation. But
in Paris--well!” Madame Didier shrugged her shoulders. “There’s no
such thing as morality. I need not tell you that _I_ have never grown
accustomed to it. I still keep my English ideas as to right and wrong.”

“I’m thankful you do, dear Helen,” murmured her aunt.

“I warned Madge,” pursued her friend. “I told her all I had heard about
him. Louis was angry with me, but I thought it my duty.”

“But she hasn’t----? I mean there isn’t any danger of--of a divorce, or
anything of that kind?”

Mrs. Carfax involuntarily lowered her voice to a horrified whisper.

“Oh no! no! Let us hope it won’t come to that. Mind, I’m not accusing
Madge of anything but foolish flirting. She made a dead set at him, I
must say that. I don’t believe that otherwise he would have taken any
notice of her. But Madge is so vain. And then she has an idea she isn’t
happy with her husband. Well! a wife must make the best of the man she
marries. I make a point of getting on with Louis.”

“I’m sure you do, dear,” interrupted her aunt. “You’re so wise.”

“But you think she’s really staying on to----?”

“I fear that the excuse of her illness is only half true. She’s staying
on I believe to--well, to go on with the flirtation, let us say.”

Madame Didier laughed a little, and took a fresh thread of silk.

“Madge is a nice little thing, of course, but she’s very flighty. I
can’t help thinking that she must have fallen under some bad influence
lately. She comes from _such_ a good home. I used to stay with her
at her father’s house just outside York, when we were schoolgirls.
The Etheridges are county people, you know. Not very rich, but well
connected, and in the _nicest_ set. No fastness or anything horrid of
that sort. The right sort of quiet county people. You know what I mean.
We rather thought she might have done better than a country doctor.”

“Dr. Dakin is _extremely_ well connected,” put in Mrs. Carfax a little
stiffly. He was a neighbour after all, and she felt that the slighting
reflection might easily extend from the faculty, to the Church, of
which her husband was so distinguished an ornament.

“Oh yes, I’m sure of it,” Madame Didier hastened to reply. “And a
clever man, I hear.”

“Extremely clever. And devoted to his wife. This will be a terrible
blow.”

Mrs. Carfax leant back in her chair, and wondered whether she should
write to George, or wait till her return. She decided to wait. A verbal
recitation would be more effective.

“Oh! let us hope she will recover her senses and return to her home.
I feel terribly distressed about it, as it was in my house she met
Monsieur Fontenelle.”

“No! She met him first at Miss Page’s,” corrected Mrs. Carfax. “I
_thought_ he seemed very attentive that evening. He was talking to her
a long time after dinner.”

Madame Didier looked up sharply from her work.

“Who _is_ this Miss Page?” she asked. “How does she come to know
Monsieur Fontenelle?”

“She’s a most charming woman. We are very proud of her at Dymfield. I
suppose she met Monsieur Fontenelle abroad. She has travelled a great
deal.”

“Ah!” Madame Didier took another thread of silk, and matched it
carefully.

“I only wondered,” she went on, “because Madge was so reticent about
her. Naturally, when I saw her becoming so very intimate with Monsieur
Fontenelle, I inquired about the woman who was responsible for the
first introduction. But I could gather nothing from Madge except that
Miss Page was a beautiful woman, and apparently a paragon of all the
virtues.”

Madame Didier sniffed slightly, and began to fold up her work.

“She’s certainly a striking looking woman, and most generous and
charitable,” returned Mrs. Carfax. “My husband would not know what to
do without her financial and other help, in the parish. Certainly we
know very little about her life before she settled at Dymfield ten
years ago,” she added rather uncertainly.

“Good works are the modern equivalent for the convent, aren’t they?”
suggested Madame Didier.

“She’s a charming woman,” repeated Mrs. Carfax in a slightly dazed
voice.

“No doubt. Yet I know one woman who doesn’t describe her in those
terms. Did you ever meet a Mrs. Crosby? No? Well, she is firmly
convinced that Miss Page robbed her of her inheritance.”

“If the doctor is at all wise, he will go and look after his wife,”
suggested Aunt Laura, her remark making a timely but unconscious
diversion.

“I’ll see what I can do,” observed Mrs. Carfax with significance.

Madame Didier looked a little alarmed. “Please don’t mention my name!”
she begged. “Remember I have said nothing, and that, only in Madge’s
interest.”

“Discretion is my strong point,” returned Mrs. Carfax with dignity. “I
am no gossip, and the last thing in the world I should wish to do, is
to make mischief.”

“You are always so wise, dear Mary,” murmured Mrs. Lovell.

The ladies talked till a late hour, and Mrs. Carfax went to bed full
of an excitement which she was shocked to recognize as distinctly
pleasurable.




XI


Tiring a little of hotel life, Anne had taken an apartment on the
heights close to the Church of the Trinità dei Monti.

In her sunny room overlooking the city, in the intervals between her
rambles, or the interchange of visits, she spent quiet happy hours.
In Rome, as in no other Italian city, time slipped back, and the life
of twenty years ago seemed often more real, more tangible, than her
existence of to-day.

Over and over again, in Rome, she was startled to find herself living
not in the present, but in the memory of an unforgetable past.

One morning, in walking through the Farnesina Palace, she stopped
before a window to look down upon a narrow walled garden. The paths
were mossy and weed-grown; the whole place pervaded by that air of
neglect and decay, common to Italian gardens. But at the end of the
enclosed oblong space, there was a beautiful old gate of marble. Orange
trees in rows, ran the length of the right-hand wall, and between the
glossy leaves, the fruit shone golden. In the centre grass plot, amidst
the long unkempt grass, there were rose bushes with pale pink monthly
roses upon them; and overhead a roof of sky blue as the heart of a
gentian.

Miss Page turned her head quickly, a half smile upon her lips, as
though to speak to some one at her side.

It was twenty years since she had looked down upon that quiet garden,
but the illusion of a bygone day was so strong, that she expected to
meet a responsive smile.

       *       *       *       *       *

The summer of which François Fontenelle had spoken to his friend, as he
sat beneath Anne’s portrait, was the summer which followed her visit to
her brother and his wife.

Anne had returned with her inner life wrecked and shattered. Her
peace of mind was gone. She spent no more quiet days in the library
with her books. A feverish restlessness drove her out of doors, where
while daylight lasted, she worked among her plants, digging, weeding,
planting with such energy that from sheer physical fatigue, she forced
herself to sleep dreamlessly till morning renewed her toil. She was
uninterrupted. No one disturbed her. She had nothing else to do.

In spite of her protestations, Mrs. Burbage who had been growing
steadily feebler through the winter, sent for a hospital nurse, and
finally kept her bed.

“I will be looked after by the right people,” she declared with
characteristic determination. “Trained nurses are the right people to
tend the sick. I can afford to pay for them, and I will have them. You
have had enough waiting upon invalids, my dear.”

Freed from nearly all her customary duties, therefore, Anne had the
long spring days before her, and with the instinct of her healthy
nature, she strove by hard physical work, to fill them, and at the same
time to crush out the mental malady which tore at her heart.

“It’s a disease, but work will kill it,” she told herself.

And she set her teeth, and worked.

She worked; but she was burdened with a great fear and a great regret.

Immersed in books, as for the last five years she had become, she had
not hitherto noticed the isolation, the narrowness of her life.

Not only had she failed to miss the intercourse of her fellow
creatures, she had actually dreaded their approach.

Filled with a nervous mistrust of her own power to please, she had
shunned humanity as represented by any living soul outside the gates of
Fairholme Court.

“I know nothing about any one,” was the dreary burden of her thoughts.
“I don’t understand anything about real men and women. My own life is
empty, and so for me, the lives of others are empty too. I have nothing
to say to them, no help to give them, I’m useless in a world of which I
know nothing except at second hand. And as I grow older my heart will
dry up and wither more and more, till I’m an old maid--the conventional
old maid.”

She planted her sad thoughts with the beds of lilies; she dug them into
the ground round the rose-bushes; and serenely, mockingly, the garden
flourished and broke gradually into a flood of bloom.

It had never looked so beautiful as on the day when Mrs. Burbage’s
maid came to her while she was watering the new rose hedge round the
sundial, to say that visitors had called, and her mistress wished Miss
Page to receive them.

The lilac bushes were cascades of amethyst bloom; the hawthorn trees
were dazzling white, or rosy to their utmost branch. Anne had broken
off great sprays of blossom which lay at the foot of the sundial, ready
to be taken into the house.

She picked them up, and full of consternation and trembling shyness,
made her way across the lawn, and entered the drawing-room by one of
the long French windows.

It seemed to her that the room was full of men, and she put out her
hand blindly to the tallest of them, murmuring incoherent words.

“I am René Dampierre,” he said. “I’m so sorry Mrs. Burbage is ill. She
knew my mother, and me too when I was a child. I should like to have
seen her.”

The words, spoken with the faintest foreign accent, were quite fluent,
and the voice was beautiful, the gentlest man’s voice Anne had ever
heard. She ventured to look at him, and involuntarily she smiled, her
confidence restored.

He was very tall, she noticed, and big, and bronzed to the roots of his
thick straw-coloured hair. His eyes were brown. Even at the moment,
Anne was conscious of surprise. She had expected them to be blue. But
they were eyes which drove away her shyness, and she was able to shake
hands calmly with his friends as he introduced them.

“This is François Fontenelle, a painter like myself. And this is
Thouret, who writes very bad verse and worse novels, and this is
Dacier who does everything--also very badly. All my friends. And
you--Mademoiselle?”

“I am Anne Page,” she said, and to her own amazement, she laughed.

They all looked so friendly, and they were not at all alarming.

“Anne Page? That is a Shakespeare name!” exclaimed the young man whom
Dampierre had first introduced.

“Shakespeare?” repeated Dacier. “_Ah! Si je pouvais seulement parler
Anglais, mademoiselle!_”

“I can speak a little French,” said Anne timidly. “But you mustn’t
laugh at my accent.”

They surrounded her then, talking a babel of mixed French and English,
and Anne found herself laughing with them, as she tried to reply to
their questions.

“May we see the garden?” asked René Dampierre presently. “Oh no! don’t
put down the flowers! I would offer to take them, but if they are not
in your way, do carry them. They are just right.”

“Oh yes! the goddess of the garden must keep her flowers,” insisted
Dacier.

Anne kept them uncomprehendingly, since her compliance seemed to please
her guests.

She was mystified. But they were all friendly and kind, and easy to
entertain. She had spoken to few men in her life, and she did not know
there were any like these. It was a new sensation to be addressed with
deference, and regarded with attention.

Never before had Anne felt flattered, and the sensation was agreeable.

She took them to her rose garden, and showed them the quaint old
sundial, which, at her instigation, the gardener had brought from an
outhouse in which she had discovered it, and set up in a space enclosed
by clipped yews.

She showed them her borders of snowy pinks, with the lavender bushes
behind them, and the garden she was making, a fancy of her own, (new
then,) in which only Shakespeare’s flowers should grow.

“There are a great many, you see,” she told them. “And such nice
old-fashioned plants. Rue and marjoram, and lavender, and marigolds. I
love marigolds, don’t you? They won’t come yet, though.”

“No. They are ‘flowers of middle summer,’” quoted Monsieur Fontenelle.
“You see I know your Shakespeare,” as Anne turned to him with a smile
of pleased surprise.

“And the ‘_daffodils that come before the swallow dares_’ are nearly
over,” said Dampierre. “But you still have some pale primroses and
the violets.... Now don’t try to show off, François, because _I_ want
to!... ‘_Violets dim, but sweeter than the lids of Juno’s eyes or
Cytherea’s breath._’”

“You are wonderful!” laughed Anne. “You are Frenchmen, but you know
_The Winter’s Tale_!”

“I ought to. I have been brought up chiefly in England,” returned
Dampierre. “But Fontenelle is a disgusting genius. He knows the
literature of all languages by instinct. He was born knowing them. In
his nurse’s arms he terrified his relations by babbling in English,
Italian, Spanish, Hebrew and Arabic.”

Anne laughed again. “Then he would like to see the library,” she said.
“I will take you there presently. I’m glad you approve my Shakespeare
garden,” she added, with a touch of the shyness she had almost
forgotten.

“It’s delicious!” declared René. “That old wall as a background, and
the mass of wallflowers--gillyflowers, Shakespeare calls them, doesn’t
he? And the beds of violets! The scent of it all! It smells of England.
And I love England, because it’s my mother’s and Shakespeare’s country.”

“You have some of your own flowers growing here,” he added, stooping
towards a bed of double narcissus, and glancing up at Anne with a smile.

“My own flowers?” she repeated, puzzled.

“Don’t you know the country name for these?” He was still smiling.
“_Sweet Nancies._”

“And in Shakespeare your name is ‘sweet Anne Page,’” added Fontenelle,
“the prettiest English name in the world.”

A faint colour came to Anne’s face. She glanced from one to another
with a look half shy, half pleased, half pitiful.

It gave place to a little movement of dignity.

“I’m glad you like my name,” she said.

In her voice there was a suggestion of fear. The fear that these
strange yet pleasant young men were laughing at her. She took them
across the sunny lawn, where the beech tree’s silken leaves had still
the freshness of spring. A thousand birds were singing and calling. The
scent of the lilac hung in the air, and the hawthorns were drenched in
fragrant snow.

Before the irregular charming front of the house, the men paused, and
breaking into French, poured out ecstasies of praise.

“_Ravissant! Quelle belle ligne! Que c’est délicieux!_”

“This is the library,” said Anne, as the men followed her through the
open window into the dim beautiful room.

It was the one room in the house unspoilt by modern furniture; left
just as it had been in her old friend’s day, with its high-backed
chairs of gilded Spanish leather, its heavy rich curtains at the
window, and the books reaching from floor to ceiling, their bindings
of calf and leather forming the most harmonious of decorations.
Simultaneously, the men uttered exclamations of delight.

Fontenelle rushed to one of the shelves, and became absorbed in the
titles of the books which he read aloud, calling to his companions now
and again, when he had discovered a treasure. René Dampierre stood in
the embrasure of one of the windows, with Anne.

“Do you read these books?” he asked, smiling down at her.

“Yes,” said Anne, simply. “I read them for nearly five years. But I
haven’t read anything lately,” she added, involuntarily.

“No? Why not?”

Again the colour rushed to her cheeks, and her companion, suddenly
curious, wondered what he could have said to destroy her composure.

“I don’t know,” she answered hurriedly. “I have been so busy in the
garden. Shall we have tea out of doors? It’s quite warm enough.”

She left him to give the order, and when the library door closed,
François abandoned the books, and crossed the room to him.

“But she’s charming!” he exclaimed, speaking in English. “Isn’t it an
unusual type? That clear pale face and the soft hair, and the soft
voice? I shall get her to sit for me.”

“She’s accustomed to be thought exceedingly plain,” remarked Dampierre.

Fontenelle made an impatient gesture.

“By the usual idiot perhaps. How do you know?”

“By her manner. She hasn’t any of the airs of a pretty woman. She
thought we were laughing at her just now, in the garden.”

“If we made her think herself pretty, _mon cher_, she’d surprise us
all. There are a thousand possibilities in that face.”

“_Allons!_ I for one am quite ready,” laughed Dampierre. “I believe
you’re right. She could be beautiful, though she’s not young. What do
you think? Thirty-two, thirty-three?--or more?”

François shrugged his shoulders. “It doesn’t matter. She’s one of the
women for whom age doesn’t count--except as an improvement.”

“An unusual case.”

“Of course. But she’s unusual. I’m going to paint her.”

“Tea’s ready,” said Anne, appearing again at the window. “It was in the
drawing-room, so I just had it carried out.”

She was quite at her ease now, and tea was a delightful meal under the
flickering shade of the beech tree.

The men praised her French, inquired how she had learnt it so well;
laughed and chattered; and finally took their leave, with many
invitations to Anne. She must come to their studio, which was really
only a barn. She must come to tea at the Falcon Inn. It was quite worth
seeing. Above all, they must come back to the most charming garden in
the world.

“_Pour revoir la déesse du jardin_,” added Thouret, lifting his hat
with a flourish, as she stood in the porch, watching their departure.




XII


“So René Dampierre has grown into a handsome man, has he?” said Mrs.
Burbage, when Anne went to her room.

She was sitting up in bed, with a shawl thrown round her shoulders.

Her face was yellow and pinched, but the eyes that looked out from
under the wasted forehead, were sharp and keen as ever.

“Well! so he ought. His mother was a beautiful creature, and his father
was well enough, as men go. Jacques Dampierre was quite a celebrated
man in Paris, thirty years ago, when I used to visit them. A writer;
a novelist, I believe. I never read any of his books. In those days
it wasn’t considered the correct thing for young women to read French
novels. And quite right too. They’re all disgraceful.

“René’s a painter, you say? Well! much good may it do him. He won’t
make money that way, though I suppose he must have come into a decent
income through his father. He’s an only son.”

“His father is dead then?” Anne asked.

“Yes, my dear, dead long ago. He died a year after his wife, and that’s
fourteen years now. She was a Leslie, one of the old stock, and as I
say, a lovely girl. Fair, is he? Like his mother then. Hers was the
only real gold hair I ever saw. And she had brown eyes, like a deer, or
a fawn, or some creature of that sort.”

Anne remembered the brown eyes that ought to have been blue. He had his
mother’s eyes as well as her hair then, evidently.

“Let me see, René must be twenty-seven or twenty-eight by this time,”
the old lady went on. “I haven’t seen him since he was a baby of
five or so. He was a pretty boy, then. They sent him over here to be
educated, at that Catholic place. Beaumont isn’t it? He ought to be
quite an Englishman, and I hope he is.”

“Well, he speaks English perfectly, with only the very slightest
accent. But I don’t think he’s at all like an Englishman,” said Anne.
“In manner, I mean,” she added.

“Humph! More’s the pity. I don’t like foreigners.”

Anne was silent. She thought she did.

“He brought friends, you say? Well, tell them to come whenever they
like, my dear. You’re quite old enough to look after them. Catherine
Leslie--Dampierre, I mean, was a good friend to me. I should like to
show hospitality to her boy.”

She turned over on the pillow, her voice growing weak.

“That will do, Anne. Nurse will see to me. I can’t talk ten minutes now
without this dreadful faintness.”

The nurse came up to the bed, and Anne stepped aside, pausing at the
door, to throw a pitying glance at the sharp profile against the pillow.

The old lady was growing visibly weaker, and Anne sorrowed. She was so
lonely, so desolate at the end of life. Childless, almost friendless,
for brusque and downright in manner, she had never possessed the happy
art of engaging the affection of others, she was going down to the
grave almost unregarded.

Few of her own generation were alive, and with the younger race she
concerned herself but little. Anne knew that she had a nephew, her
sister’s child. She had occasionally spoken of him as her heir,
generally with the dry comment that she grudged him the money.

“He’s a great gaby,” she often declared, “and his vulgar wife will make
ducks and drakes of my fortune.

“But there, my dear, what does it matter? In the place where I go
there’s neither knowledge nor understanding. It will be all the same to
me.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Anne left the sick-room, and from force of habit, wandered out into the
garden.

“How lonely! How desolate!” she found herself thinking.

“And I shall be just as lonely, just as desolate when it comes to my
turn.”

She turned her face towards the quiet evening sky, in which, despite
one or two trembling stars, the flush of sunset still lingered, and
again despair fell like a cold hand upon her heart.

All the afternoon she had felt so gay. She had been amused, interested,
almost flattered.

Now the words she had just heard, recurred to her. “Tell them to come.
You are quite old enough to look after them.”

A sudden miserable sensation of shame assailed her, to remember how
young she had felt. In welcoming her visitors, she had not thought of
her age at all. She had accepted them as equals and contemporaries.

The blinding tears which made her stumble on the path already dim with
twilight, caused her to bow her head with the instinct of hiding them
even from herself.

“I’m quite old--quite old,” she repeated with something that was partly
a sob, partly a shiver. “They didn’t make me feel it, because they are
kind, and they have charming manners. But they are young, and life is
all before them. It’s all over for me--and I’ve never had it.”

The bats skimmed noiselessly past her, in the dusk. All the birds had
ceased singing. It was nearly dark, but with a horror of returning to
the house, of being shut within four walls, Anne sat at the foot of the
sundial, and in the darkness her tears fell.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yet next morning, in the sunshine, when René Dampierre came to ask her
to the “studio,” it seemed not only easy, but natural, to smile, and be
well pleased. When she found herself with her new friends, depressing
thoughts fled like magic.

They were so obviously glad to see her. They interested her so much
with their discussions, their enthusiasm, their talk, fresh and new
to her, of methods, and values and style, in painting, in writing, in
music, in the whole world of art to which hitherto she had travelled
alone; speechless, like a ghost amongst ghosts.

From the outset, Anne saw that René Dampierre was regarded with a
certain admiring respect by his companions. Already he was considered a
great man; already they looked up to him as a leader, an authority.

Little by little, emerging from her provincial ignorance, she realized
that a world of art existed in Paris, in which these young men had
already made a place for themselves, and were recognized. From the
first, it was chiefly through François Fontenelle that her imagination
began to work, began to construct the life, the surroundings, the
whole framework of existence, with its modern thought, its ideals, its
ambitions, out of which her friends had for a moment stepped into the
stagnant peacefulness of this English village. It was with François
that she talked most easily. His fluent speech, his gift of picturesque
narration and description, led her to realize a new world; gave sight
to her eyes, gave her understanding.

Thouret and Dacier were delightful boys, younger by three or four years
than the other two friends.

Anne liked them heartily, and was amused by their boyish high spirits,
and nonsense talk, but her real interest was with François Fontenelle,
and René Dampierre.

With René, her shyness lasted longer than with the others, and often
as she searched her mind for the reason, she could never determine it,
except that as she incoherently put it to herself, he was “so absurdly
good-looking.”

His manner to her was charming, more charming perhaps than the manner
of any of the others, though they all treated her with that flattering
air of mingled deference and admiration to which she was growing
accustomed. But despite herself, the little tremor of confusion when
René addressed her, never ceased to trouble and embarrass her. In the
company of François she was at her ease; interested, pleased, serene,
ready to talk or to listen. René alone, though she loved him to talk
to her, longed for it in fact with an intensity for which she often
despised herself, never succeeded in effacing a secret inexplicable
dismay.

The days passed on. May slipped into a radiant June. It was a brilliant
summer, warm and sunny, the first happy summer Anne had ever known.

Early in their acquaintance Fontenelle had asked her to sit to him, and
out of doors, in the garden of Fairholme Court, he made sketch after
sketch.

He was always dissatisfied.

“It isn’t right!” he exclaimed time after time. “You are the most
elusive creature in the world. I don’t think I know you well enough yet
to get down what I want. But some day I will paint you. You are going
to make my fortune!”

“Then you must come again--many times,” Anne said.

Even while she spoke, her smile died.

Next summer, who could tell where she might be? She could not blind
herself to the seriousness of her friend’s illness.

And when she was gone?

Anne refused to look forward. Once long ago, Mrs. Burbage had told her
she need not be anxious about the future.

“I shall see that you don’t starve, my dear,” she had said.

But Anne realized that her life would be very different. It would
probably mean facing the world once more in some sort of struggle
for existence, without the companionship, which quiet unemotional as
it was, meant all she had ever known of a friendly home, and human
affection.

Often as these reflections assailed her, she put them from her. This
was her summer. She would not spoil it by thinking of cold rain and
wintry days.

It was while she was sitting to François that they talked most; and
always sooner or later, the conversation centred upon René Dampierre.

“He has genius,” François assured her with the generous enthusiasm of
an artist for work that is beyond his own powers.

“We are all desperately excited about René’s career. He will be great,
as Corot, as Daubigny are great. He is the coming man. You will see.
In ten years time, he will be a leader, the founder of a new school of
painting; a great power in France. Oh! we’re going to be proud of René!
Unless, of course,” he added with a change of tone, “he plays the fool.
There’s always that to fear with him. He must let women alone. They’re
the very devil for smashing up a man’s work; and that’s René’s weak
side. He’s a fool about women. Just the sort of sentimental fool who’s
capable of marrying one of them. And if he does----” Fontenelle’s shrug
of the shoulders and the gesture of his disengaged hand, completed the
sentence.

“Why?”

Anne was accustomed to frank conversation from François Fontenelle. He
discussed his own love affairs with perfect freedom. He told her of the
adventures of his acquaintances in Paris, and with a Frenchman’s love
of analysis, entered into long discussions on the psychology of love
and passion.

Anne listened calmly. Ignorant as she was, except through her reading,
of the phase of existence he described, she had by this time grown
to form a very fair idea of the emotional life of the men in her
friend’s set in Paris. Much of what François said, she heard with
incomprehension, not of the facts, but of the feelings to which
they corresponded. She was neither shocked nor surprised. François’
conversation never offended her. He talked to her frankly as to a grown
woman of intelligence, and she accepted his confidences as simply as
they were offered.

As yet, Anne knew little about herself. It had never occurred to her to
analyze her own temperament. Throughout her life it never occurred to
her, and in this circumstance lay the secret of a certain simplicity
which to her dying day she preserved.

It never struck her that her character, formed in a seclusion
unaffected by the clash of argument and conflicting ethical opinion,
was wide and generous, and original. Free-thinking in the true sense
of the word, inasmuch as her thoughts were her own, uncoloured by
the prejudices and predilections of any sect or party. Her life had
been forced into a narrow channel, but quite spontaneously, quite
naturally, her nature accepted a wide outlook, and extended sympathy
and tolerance to lives and standpoints of necessity different from her
own.

To many men apparently, love as she had dreamed of it, was an utterly
different conception from that she had formed for herself. She accepted
the fact, merely trying to understand.

“Why?” she repeated. “He might find the right wife.”

François smiled as he looked up from his drawing, and met her blue
eyes, candid as a child’s, but a woman’s eyes nevertheless.

“Sweet Anne Page!” he exclaimed. “Why shouldn’t he find the right wife?
The chances are a million to one against it. Even if she exists. She
would have to be a miracle of self-sacrifice and comprehension, and
tact and wisdom, if she were not to stand in his way. René is an artist
to his finger tips, and if only out of consideration for women, no
great artist should marry. No! René must always love and ride away. And
the women he loves must be those who are accustomed to see the cavalier
depart, without grieving. The women who merely look out for the next.”

Anne was silent. It was a way of love she did not understand. Yet she
could imagine its existence.

“Men must be very different,” she said after a long pause. “That sort
of thing would hurt a woman so much. One sort of woman, I mean. I think
it would kill the best in her, so that if she were doing any work like
painting, for instance, far from helping her, it would _prevent_ her
from doing as well as she might.”

“Men _are_ different. Most men. And if women would only recognize the
fact, there would be fewer tears. Love is your whole existence, as
one of your poets says, I believe. Bryon, is it? For us it’s often an
episode,--more often a series of episodes. Sometimes, rarely, the other
thing. But that for an artist is not a consummation to be desired.
Think! His whole existence! What becomes of his work if it’s merged in
the life of one woman? Why it goes to pot, of course,” he went on with
one of his rapid descents into English slang, which combined with his
foreign accent always made Anne smile.

“No, that’s the price an artist pays--if it’s a heavy price, which I
doubt,” he added with the cynicism of youth. “No absorbing loves for
him. Love is necessary for his imagination, of course. It fires him
with enthusiasm. It gives him delight and gaiety, and bestows on him
the joyous mind to work. But if he’s a wise man, no absorbing passions.
Above all, no ties.”

Anne sighed. “I see what you mean. But it seems that art is very cruel.”

“It is.”

“Then I think if what you say is true, an artist ought to keep out of
the way of any woman who--cares. But he wouldn’t if she pleased him,”
she added softly.

François laughed. “In your wisdom you have divined the natural
selfishness of man,” he said.

As the months passed slowly on, a change, or rather a development
gradual but steady, was taking place in Anne’s nature, a development
that presently made itself manifest in her appearance, in her attitude,
in her demeanour, physical as well as mental.

Slowly but surely, she was waking to the consciousness of her
womanhood, and of her power.

The men whom she had grown to know intimately, regarded her with
obvious admiration.

In their eyes at least, the eyes of artists, it was evident that she
was not as she had hitherto imagined, destitute either of beauty or of
attractive charm.

_Ah! Voilà sweet Anne Page!_ She had grown used to the frequent
exclamation when she appeared in the garden in which at Mrs. Burbage’s
desire they were always free to come and go as they pleased.

It no longer made her feel embarrassed and uncertain as to its
sincerity.

Her friends’ admiration for her had become a sort of cult. She was
a new type, a woman to be praised--discreetly, with deference--yet
praised. They brought to her the incense of a sincere flattery, and to
Anne, starved of affection, unconsciously waiting for love, it was very
sweet.

She accepted it humbly, gratefully, with a surprise as great as her
pleasure. But it could not fail to produce results.

She began to take pains with her dress, and her natural taste made it
easy to adapt the simple gowns she possessed, into becoming garments.
When René Dampierre exclaimed how well something suited her, she went
to the glass and looked at herself with innocent gratification and
astonishment to find that he was right.

Her eyes grew softly bright. There was often a faint colour in her
cheeks.

Even to the unobservant conventional bystander, that summer Anne
was charming. If she scarcely recognized herself when she saw her
reflection in the glass, the change in her mental personality still
further surprised her.

By degrees, so slowly, so insensibly that it seemed a natural process,
she had found herself, and in making that discovery, she had made
others.

These men who had seemed so strange and wonderful at first;--beings
from another planet, whose thoughts she did not understand, whom
she watched with interested amazed eyes, became in one sense very
simple people. People easily swayed and managed by a woman older than
themselves, a woman naturally intuitive, but hitherto deprived of the
opportunity of exercising gifts of which she had only recently become
aware.

Her conversations with François Fontenelle, as well as her previous
wide reading, had removed her ignorance of facts. The rest, now that
she was freed from the shackles of self-mistrust, lay well within her
natural powers.

To François Fontenelle, a quick observer, even then a man of the
world, possessed of the keen and subtle intelligence which in later
years was to stand him in good stead for the promotion of his material
prosperity, the change was early discernible. He viewed it with
secret amusement, and inasmuch as he felt himself to a large extent
responsible, some pride, and finally a touch of uneasiness.

It was as though some gentle creature too inexperienced to know its
strength, had unexpectedly without in any way losing its gentleness,
become dangerous. Dangerous to itself, dangerous perhaps to others. He
often found himself glancing uncertainly at René, and then reassuring
himself by recalling his friend’s natural instinctive manner to women.

René was always a great success with women. His voice altered when he
spoke to them; his attentions were very charming.

François had heard the voice, and witnessed the attentions many times
before, and they had never meant anything more than the sort of thing
which according to him, in the wisdom of his sapient youth, was “all
right.” The love of a few weeks; at most, a few months. Nothing in
short that from his point of view could affect the artist seriously,
or jeopardize his position. Why then should he feel uneasy? Except of
course, that this was a different matter. Anne’s was not the usual
case; he could imagine no one further from the type of woman who with
_sang-froid_ watches the departing cavalier.

The idea was preposterous, ludicrous to entertain side by side with the
idea of Anne Page. If Anne fell in love--heavens! if Anne fell in love!

His brain almost ceased working at the bare notion.

“René would be done for,” he reflected incoherently. “I know his idiocy
where women are concerned. And if a woman like Anne Page falls in love,
there’ll be the devil to pay! He’d have to marry her. A woman years
older than himself. And then exactions, tears, jealousy of him, of his
work. Oh awful! Horrible!”

His rage at the bare possibility of such an event extended at moments
to Anne. “I know these gentle women!” he told himself vindictively.
“They’re worse than any of them, when it comes to a love affair.
Tenacious, determined, implacable----”

And then Anne would enter the drawing-room to welcome him, or come
across the grass. Anne with her sweet gay smile, and her gentle
dignity, and his anger died.

It was all right, of course. What a fool he had been! The idea had
never occurred to either of them, and all he had to do was to keep his
preposterous notions to himself.

Moreover, September had arrived, and the time for the return of the
whole party to Paris was approaching. René certainly seemed in no
hurry to depart. But that was comprehensible.

He was working hard, and as François allowed, never had he worked
better. There was a tenderness and grace in his landscapes which was
new to them, inspired he said by the gracious beauty of Shakespeare’s
county.

But he had finished the picture upon which lately all his efforts had
been concentrated, and François was already urging that it was time to
go.

They were all in the garden one afternoon, when the subject was first
mentioned.

“This is delicious, charming, adorable!” exclaimed François, suddenly
looking from the lawn across the level meadows, over which the sun was
setting. “It has been a summer snatched out of Paradise. But we must be
getting home to our daily toil.”

Tea was over, but the table, laden with silver and dainty china, had
not yet been removed.

Anne sat near it, in a basket chair, an open book on her knee, from
which at the men’s request she had been reading.

Her white muslin dress with its froth of frills trailed on the grass.

The muslin fichu crossed in front and knotted at the waist, revealed a
glimpse of her long white throat.

Despite himself, François glanced at her curiously.

Her face was unmoved, but he fancied he detected the faintest tremor of
the frills at her breast.

René was lying in a hammock slung beneath the beech tree, and the two
younger men lay on the grass, smoking.

François’ remark was greeted with a torrent of invective from them.

Paris be consigned to everlasting perdition! It was still summer. Why
talk of going?

René was silent. He raised himself in the hammock, and with half-closed
eyes, looked at the evening fields.

“What a beautiful effect,” he said at last. “Look there, where the mist
is rising. I must get that. There’s a picture.”

“You’ve finished your picture, _mon vieux_,” returned François,
speaking in French. “I know the history of another one. You’ll mess
about, and paint out, till the snow is on the ground. There isn’t time.
No! The hour has arrived to pack up.”

“We can’t leave sweet Anne Page!” declared Dacier half seriously. He
turned on his elbow, and glanced up at her, smiling. Without speaking,
Anne returned his smile.

“She looks like an early Italian Madonna disguised as a Reynolds
portrait,” thought François suddenly. “Why on earth has she grown so
ridiculously attractive!” was his next irritable reflection.

“She must come to Paris,” declared Thouret.

“But of course she must come to Paris! When will you come, Mademoiselle
Anne? At once, won’t you? It’s a magnificent idea. We’d take her to the
Elysée Montmartre and to the Nouvelle Athènes. Yes! And to Versailles!
Versailles in the autumn. Magnificent! And the little streets in
Montmartre, and the Place Pigale! Seriously wouldn’t it be splendid to
show our Paris to Anne Page?”

They talked all together, exclaiming and laughing, François joining
them.

Dampierre alone said nothing. He was still gazing over the fields, now
smouldering with faint gold, from which here and there like incense, a
ghostly mist was rising.

“There’s a picture there,” he repeated.

“Hang the picture!” exclaimed Dacier and Thouret together.
“Mademoiselle Anne Page is coming to Paris. Aren’t you, mademoiselle?”

Anne shook her head. “I never go anywhere.” She was still smiling, but
François felt a sudden pang of pity and compunction. To his sensitive
ear, the words were an epitome of Anne’s life.

When it was growing dusk, they rose, and this evening Anne did not ask
them to stay.

Often when it was dull, or too cold to sit in the garden, she took them
into the library, showed them her favourite books, sometimes read to
them. Because as Dacier said, it was good for their English accent, and
she had such a beautiful voice.

To-day she walked with them to the porch, and said good-bye, in a tone
that was as friendly as ever.

“Tell me when you decide to go,” she said. “We must have a picnic or
something for farewell.”

François turned at the gate, and saw her standing in the porch, her
dress startlingly white in the dusk. He shrugged his shoulders, but
involuntarily the troubling sense of having wounded some defenceless
creature, returned to him. He told himself that he was a sentimental
fool, but the illusion did not vanish.




XIII


For the next week, Anne saw little of her friends.

The day after the suggestion for their departure had been made, the old
doctor who attended Mrs. Burbage, asked to see her.

“I’m not satisfied with our patient’s progress,” he said, closing the
library door with much precaution. “I think, Miss Page, I should prefer
to have another opinion, and I propose writing to-night to Dr. Mears of
Harley Street.”

Anne listened with fear at her heart, and the next day, the specialist
arrived from London.

After a lengthy visit, and a subsequent conversation between the
doctors, she was told that the case was serious, and an operation would
probably be necessary.

“Write to her relatives at once,” advised Dr. Mears, taking up his hat.
“I can’t disguise from you that there’s cause for anxiety.”

Anne obeyed, and her letter was answered by a telegram, announcing the
arrival of Mrs. Burbage’s nephew and his wife.

The intimation of their proposed visit was received by the patient with
a grim smile.

“Let them come if they please,” she remarked. “I don’t propose to
endure much of their society. I shall claim the privileges of a sick
woman.”

They arrived the same evening; Mr. Crosby, a weak-looking undecided
man of forty, whose thin fair hair was plastered over a retreating
forehead, and his wife, a stout somewhat vulgar woman, arrogant and
over-bearing.

The visit was not a success.

Mrs. Burbage, who once decided upon a course of action, remained
characteristically obstinate, granted them one interview of ten
minutes, after which her door was resolutely closed.

Mrs. Crosby, pleading solicitude for the relative who had always
repulsed her advances, appealed to Anne, whom she at first treated with
the superciliousness suitable to a dependent who had without doubt
acquired for her own ends, a culpable ascendency over the old lady’s
mind.

Three months previously, Anne would have been helpless in her hands;
too nervous and self-mistrustful to cope with a blustering woman of
the world.

Now, scarcely to her own surprise, so insensibly had the change in her
been wrought, to all Mrs. Crosby’s attempted coercion, she preserved a
self-possessed opposition.

Mrs. Burbage did not wish to see her nephew, or his wife.

That was enough. She did not see them. After two days which exercised
all Anne’s powers of tact and self-restraint, Mrs. Crosby returned to
her Devonshire home, her husband in tow, infuriated and baffled by
the quiet woman whose imperturbable dignity still further roused her
resentment.

“Mark my words Fred, that’s a designing creature!” she exclaimed as
they drove to the station. “She behaves as though she were mistress of
the place. An ugly pale-faced woman like that!”

“My dear, I don’t think her ugly exactly, and her figure is certainly
very good,” murmured Fred, whose folly was proverbial.

“Ridiculous!” panted his wife. “You’re a perfect fool, Fred! I hope
your aunt won’t leave her a farthing. It would serve her right.
Fortunately we know that the place and everything is yours, otherwise I
should leave no stone unturned to get rid of that young person.”

Anne was occupied next day with preparations for the removal of her
friend to the nursing home in London decided upon by the doctors. Only
the nurse accompanied her.

“No, my dear. I refuse to have you with me,” she said authoritatively
to Anne. “What’s the use of dragging you to town when nurse does all I
want? If they don’t kill me between them, you shall come up and see me
afterwards. I shall want a little change from doctors and nurses then.
Just now, you’d only be in the way.”

Anne drove with her to the station, and helped to arrange her
comfortably in the invalid carriage.

“Good-bye, my dear,” she said rather faintly, as Anne bent over her.
She kissed her, and with one of her rare caresses, gently patted her
hand.

“You’re a good girl,” she added. “If I get well, it will only be for
the pleasure of seeing you again. You’ve got quite pretty, Anne. I
always had a weakness for pretty people. Tell the young man, what’s his
name?--René, I’m sorry I didn’t see him.”

“He wanted to come to say good-bye,” murmured Anne, trying to control
her voice.

Mrs. Burbage shook her head, and her eyes closed.

“I can’t talk to young people. I’m past it,” she whispered. “Good-bye,
my dear. God bless you.”

The train moved slowly out of the station, leaving Anne on the
platform, blind with tears.

She tried to remember that the London doctor thought the case by no
means hopeless. In vain. She felt desolate and overwhelmed. She was
alone--and her other friends were going too.

Resolutely Anne turned her mind from this last thought. She would not
tell herself that it was because she dared not face it. They were going
next morning; and in the afternoon they came to say good-bye.

Though late in the month, the day was fine and warm, and for the last
time, tea was laid out of doors. Anne was very quiet and very pale.

Dacier and Thouret commiserated with her on the loss of her friend.

“But she’ll get well. It’s all right,” they assured her cheerfully.

François unobserved, watched her carefully.

René was also very silent, and François was grateful for the high
spirits of the two boys. They insisted before leaving, that Anne should
give them each a flower from her Shakespeare garden.

The flowers of middle summer filled the borders now.

“Here they are, all of them!” said François. “Hot lavender, mints,
savory, marjoram and marigolds.”

“But none of you are middle-aged, so they are not for you,” Anne
returned.

She picked a late rose for each of them, Dacier and Thouret receiving
theirs with extravagant delight.

“It shall be buried with me,” Dacier exclaimed. “But not yet. I’ve got
a few things to do first.”

François groaned. “When I think of the reams of execrable poems I’m
doomed to read before that!” he exclaimed as they strolled under
the yellowing trees. “Look here! We must really go. I’ve got all my
canvases to pack, and so has René.”

“But it’s only au revoir,” declared Thouret. “Sweet Anne Page is coming
to Paris. _C’est déjà une chose tout-à-fait entendue. Nous la menerons
entendre Sara, et Mounet-Sully dans Hernani._”

“We shall have her with us before the winter sets in. And then we shall
come back next year,” added Dacier.

“Good-bye,” returned Anne simply, shaking hands with each of them in
turn.

She walked back into the house when they were gone, noticing minutely,
trivial things such as a little stain on the paint in the hall; a
flower that had fallen out of a jar on the window ledge.

An hour later--when it was nearly dark, René Dampierre found her in the
rose garden.

She stood quite still when she saw him coming, and waited for him to
speak.

“I came back,” he began, stammering a little. “The maid told me you
were in the garden. I forgot this book. You lent it to me.”

He held it out to her as he spoke. It was a little volume of Herrick.

“Keep it,” Anne said. “It’s mine.”

Her voice was steady, but her hands were icy cold, and she was
shivering.

He came close to her.

“May I? Then will you put my name in it, as well as yours? Here’s a
pencil.”

She rested the book on the sundial, and bent low over it, perhaps
because of the fading light.

“It’s too damp for you out here, in that thin dress,” he said in a low
voice. “You’re shivering.” He touched her hand, and she shrank back
against the sundial.

“Anne,” he said, still more softly, and his voice trembled. “Anne,
I can’t say good-bye. Promise that you’ll come to Paris this winter.
Promise! You will, won’t you?”

He took both her cold hands, and suddenly put them to his lips.

It was too dark to see her face, but he heard her catch her breath, and
when she spoke, he scarcely recognized her voice.

“Good-bye, René. I want you to go now. Yes, I mean it. Please go.”

The words, so gently spoken that he knew he had not offended her, were
full of the authority of a woman who expects to be obeyed. He hesitated
a second, then bent his head again, and Anne felt him kiss the sleeve
of her dress.

A moment later, she saw his tall figure pass like a darker shadow,
through the shadows that hung round the gate in the wall. Long after
all the light was gone, she stood where he had left her.

She knew why he had gone. Almost as though she had been present, she
knew all the wisdom his friend François Fontenelle had that day been
pouring into his ears. She pictured François’ cold ironical anger if he
knew, or if he came to know, of this second farewell. Bitterest pang of
all, she knew that he was right.

She stood clasping her hands together.

“It’s all too late--too late,” she kept repeating unconsciously,
shivering from head to foot.

       *       *       *       *       *

Anne’s prescience was not at fault. Late the same night, after the two
younger men had gone to their rooms, Fontenelle sat in the parlour of
the Falcon Inn, and discussed her with his friend.

“You’ve been a fool, my dear fellow,” he remarked in his dryest tone.
“I warned you not to go back. Why couldn’t you let well alone?”

René sprang restlessly to his feet, and stood with his back to the fire
which he had just lighted.

“You know well enough. Why do you ask absurd questions,” he returned
irritably. “It’s no use talking. I know I’m a fool. But I can’t get her
out of my head.”

François leant forward to tap his pipe against the brickwork of the
fireplace.

“You must,” he said shortly. “It’s madness. This isn’t a case for
fooling. It’s marriage--and suicide. If it were marriage _or_ suicide
you would be a wise man to choose the latter alternative,” he added
grimly.

René moved impatiently. “I know. I know. You needn’t rub it in.
But--she’s adorable. I can’t forget her.”

François regarded him patiently. “My dear fellow,” he said after a
moment, “you may think you’re in love, but do at least try to keep off
arrant nonsense. You know as well as I do that you _will_ forget her.
That two months after you get back, she’ll be an occasional sentimental
memory, and that a year hence, you will never think of her at all.”

René laughed shortly. “You’re a detestable brute!” he exclaimed with
the half wistful half amused smile of a spoilt child, which made part
of his charm.

“And the worst of it is, you’re always right. I don’t want to marry
her. I don’t want to marry any one. I’m not the man to marry. I’ve got
work to do. You’re quite right. I was a fool to go back.”

“And I suppose there was a love scene, and a declaration of sorts?”

François’ voice was ironical, but there was anxiety under the light
words.

“No.” He grew suddenly grave. “She asked me to go--and I went.”

There was a silence which lasted some minutes. The wood fire crackled,
and the lamp illumined the comfortable room with its fifteenth-century
beams overhead, its panelled walls and its red-covered sofa and chairs.

“Anne Page is not a woman to fool with,” said François at last. He
was thinking of what she had once said, sitting in the sunshine of the
garden. “_Then an artist ought to keep out of the way of any woman who
cares. But he wouldn’t if she pleased him._”

The memory of the last words touched him.

“She’s not made for that sort of thing. It’s not decent. It’s not
playing the game. Leave her alone, and she’ll forget.”

Even as he spoke, he wondered whether he spoke truth; but that was a
question to be dismissed with a mental shrug.

“I dare say she’s got nothing to forget,” returned René gloomily. “I’ve
no doubt she thinks I’m just a ridiculous young fool.”

François did not reply.

“Women are strange things,” pursued René presently. “They alter so.
Anne has grown years younger,--and years older since we first saw her.
She manages us now. Have you noticed?” He turned to the other man
with a quick smile. “She couldn’t have done that at first. She was
too shy, and--what’s the word?--diffident. And yet at first, did she
seem a woman to fall in love with? I never thought of it. I believe we
all looked upon her as an interesting creature, and thought ourselves
rather fine fellows for discovering her beauty,--which perhaps doesn’t
exist at all. She was something to paint, something to discuss----”

“Something to teach,” added François slowly.

He glanced at the clock. “Come along! Do you see the time? And we’ve
got to start at seven to-morrow.”

He got up, and put his pipe in his pocket.

“The art of life, my dear young friend,” he remarked with burlesque
sententiousness, as he turned out the lamp, “is to manage one’s
episodes carefully. And to see that they remain episodes.”

René did not reply. He remained seated in the armchair, after the light
was out, staring at the still leaping fire.




XIV


Three days after Mrs. Burbage went away, Anne received a telegram,
summoning her at once to London. The hours spent in travelling, and
reaching the nursing-home, passed like an uneasy nightmare, with a
background of dread to be realized, and by the time she arrived at the
house in Wimpole Street, her friend was unconscious.

She died a few minutes after Anne was admitted to her bedside.

Of the time that followed, Anne had no clear idea. She felt dazed and
uncomprehending, and when by the end of the week, she found herself
back again in the silent house at Dymfield, it was to wonder vaguely
how she had arrived, and in what a solicitor’s letter which awaited
her, could possibly concern her.

The writer, who signed himself William Chaplin, expressed his intention
of calling upon her next day, on business.

Anne received him the following afternoon, standing before the fire in
the library, very slim and tall in her black dress.

Instinctively she had taken refuge in this room, as the one place
unconnected with Mrs. Burbage; the room that held no memories of her.

The grey-haired man who entered, shook hands with her rather
impressively, and sat down, with the remark that she was no doubt
acquainted with the contents of Mrs. Burbage’s will.

“No,” returned Anne, “except that I understood that everything was to
go to Mr. Crosby, her nephew.”

The lawyer glanced at her rather sharply.

“The last will is in your favour,” he replied. “Everything is left to
you unconditionally. This house--all my client’s property--her real and
personal estate. Everything in short.”

Anne turned a shade paler. She did not understand, but she was aware
that the little grey-haired man before her, was making what seemed to
him at least, an important announcement.

At the end of half-an-hour’s conversation, she followed him to the
door, still unable to grasp the significance of his words.

“The will, as I say, is most simple,” he remarked. “Everything is
quite straightforward, and we ought to be able to get the whole thing
through speedily. In the meantime, I congratulate you, Miss Page,”
he added dryly. “Apart from the income, Fairholme Court is a most
delightful residence.” He glanced about him. “Most delightful,” he
added.

Anne shook hands with him, and went slowly back to the library.

Dinner was served as usual by the quiet maids, whose demeanour since
the death of their mistress, had assumed an added shade of decorous
gravity.

They liked Anne, and their manner towards her expressed a kindliness
and sympathy for which she was grateful.

To-night, she scarcely noticed their solicitude, and the dishes they
set before her were taken away almost untasted.

She wandered into the library again after her lonely meal, and began to
pace the floor aimlessly.

From time to time, she took a book from one of the shelves, opened it,
glanced at a page that was meaningless, and unconscious of her action,
replaced the volume.

The dry monotonous voice of the lawyer, re-echoed in her brain. He was
saying words which signified nothing.

“Your income will amount to between four and five thousand a year.”

Out of a mass of detail, it was only this she remembered, and at
present it conveyed nothing to her mind.

She was conscious only of a feeling of loving gratitude that her friend
had cared for her. Of what that care implied, in those first hours she
realized nothing. She could only think of her last words at the station.

“If I get better, it will be for the pleasure of seeing you again.”

Her eyes filled with tears as she remembered them.

Gradually the hours wore on. The servants went to bed, and the house
was silent. Mechanically Anne piled fresh logs on the fire, and at last
conscious of exhaustion from her ceaseless pacing of the room, she sank
into a chair, and held her hands to the blaze.

She was a rich woman now, the lawyer had said so.

What did that mean? With all her strength Anne tried to translate the
statement into comprehensible terms.

First of all, it surely meant freedom from anxiety. No weary
heart-breaking toil for a bare existence. No painful counting of
hard-earned shillings.

Then,--for the first time Anne felt a definite thrill of pleasure,--it
meant the power to help her brother. Hugh should be made happy if money
could compass it.

And afterwards? Well, the realization of some of her day-dreams. She
could travel. The wonderful material world need no longer be a mirage,
a prospect viewed only by the eye of faith and imagination. She might
become the possessor of many beautiful things. Pictures, books,
furniture, dress. She would have the power to help people; to relieve
misery; to do some tangible good. Money was a talisman to unlock some
of the exquisite secrets of the world.

Anne paused. Her thoughts, clear at last, and swiftly moving, were
suddenly arrested.

Her wealth might do all this, but there was one joy it could not buy,
and missing this, all the rest, all the wonders it could work, seemed
dust and ashes. Dead Sea fruit. The time for love was gone, and it had
become the one impossible, unattainable desire of her whole being.

Missing it, she would miss the meaning of existence.

The pageant of the world might be revealed, but it would be seen under
the grey skies of common day; for ever unillumined by the light that
never was on land or sea.

Again in her heart there rose the fierce pain, the sickening hunger she
had experienced when for the first time in her life, she had seen the
eyes of happy lovers.

Swiftly in bitter mockery, her memory placed her once more in the
rose-garden, where a week ago René had kissed her hands, and spoken to
her in the shaken voice she had never heard from a man’s lips before.

If only she had been the girl to whom he ought to have been pleading!
If only she had felt the right to say she loved him too. If only she
had been the girl she longed to be, the wisdom of the wise would
have seemed an idle song. She would have given him her love, freely,
generously, without counting the cost, and the future might have taken
care of itself.

But as it was----

Suddenly Anne rose to her feet. The colour surged up into her face; the
warm blood raced through her body. She put her trembling fingers on the
mantelpiece, to steady herself, and stood looking down into the fire.

As it was--why not?

She felt bewildered, dazed, giddy with the thought that had come to
her, as emerging from a dark passage, one staggers in the glare of a
brilliantly lighted room. Through the dazzling incoherency of her
idea, she clung to one certainty.

If René was not in love with her as she understood love, he was at
least drawn to her as a man is drawn irresistibly to a woman. He had
been in her hands that night. She could have done as she pleased with
him.

Anne knew her power at last, and deliberately, for his sake,
she had not used it. He had gone away. He would forget, of
course--unless----Slowly she sank into her chair, and sat thinking.

She thought through all her life. She thought of the never-ending days
of childhood and youth, unlighted by any happiness, any hope; the
dreary days which had killed at last even her dreams.

She thought of Hugh and his wife in a distant colony, happy, regardless
of her, unmindful, unless she wrote to them, of her very existence.

She thought of the heart of despair which she had brought back to this
very room six months ago, of the dumb certainty that life for her had
been, was, and ever would be, empty of all gifts, of all delight. And
then of the wonderful months that had just passed. Wonderful, because
of all she had learnt of others--and of herself.

She remembered the diffident shrinking creature, who for shyness could
scarcely lift her eyes to the men she regarded with awe, as dwellers in
another world, whether gods or devils she did not know.

She could have smiled as she thought of them now.

They were neither gods nor devils, but weak human beings like herself.
Weaker than herself, since they were young, impressionable clay in the
hands of the potter.

And one of them loved her.

She leant forward in her chair, and covered her face with her hands.

A week ago, it had been an obscure penniless woman who had found
courage to arrest an impending declaration of love.

To-day, the same woman,--she was rich, her own mistress, independent,
free.

With a wondering sense of the simplicity of the matter, Anne saw
herself at liberty to take a step the very existence of which, till
to-night, she had not perceived.

She sat immovable, staring into the fire, thinking. In the silence
of the sleeping house she looked at facts face to face, and made her
decision. Here was she, Anne Page, not only a rich woman and her own
mistress, but practically alone in the world. Life had hitherto offered
her nothing. Now if she had courage to take it, a great if brief
happiness was within her reach. She loved, and was beloved. Too late,
as she had thought. But was it after all too late? Again Anne reflected
while the fire upon which her unseeing eyes were fixed, leapt and sang
softly to itself. Not if she could find the further courage to buy her
happiness at a great price. To take it while it lasted, and of her own
accord relinquish it before it had ceased to be happiness.

For as she thought and planned Anne saw clearly, as only a woman who is
leaving her youth behind, can see clearly--without illusions, with only
stern facts to guide her.

René Dampierre was young. Naturally, inevitably, sooner or later, he
would turn to youth for love, and she must not stand in his way.

But because of this, could she not even for a little while know the joy
which was every woman’s birthright?

If she were willing to pay for it, why not? Whatever happened, whatever
misery was in store, at least she paid alone. She involved no one in
her debt.

A cynic might have smiled at the simplicity of her reasoning. Not one
thought of her changed circumstances entered into her reflections. She
did not consider that Anne Page the penniless companion was a very
different being from Anne Page the lady of great means. To her mind it
only affected the situation in so far that it gave her freedom; made
it possible for her to follow her own course without burdening man,
woman, or child. It was only courage that was necessary. Courage to
stake high, and not to shrink when sooner or later the odds should turn
against her.

She measured her strength, and made her decision.

The little clock on the mantelpiece struck three, with a shrill silvery
clamour. Anne started, and glanced round the familiar room with a shock
of surprise, as though she had been long away, and was astonished to
find it there.

As she rose slowly to her feet, her reflection in the glass above the
chimney-piece also startled her.

It seemed to her that for ages she had been out of the body also.

She met absorbed blue eyes in a face pale but transfigured by an inner
excitement and a great hope.

She saw a mouth sweet and tremulous, and a tall figure; very graceful,
really beautiful; and suddenly she smiled.

“It’s not absurd. Not yet,” was the certainty that suddenly filled her
with triumphant joy.




XV


Early in November, Dampierre burst one morning into Fontenelle’s
studio. They worked in the same house in the Rue Notre Dame des Champs,
René on the top floor, François two flights lower down.

He looked up as his friend came in.

“Yes. I know. She’s coming,” he said, without ceasing to paint. “This
background’s the very devil. It’s all wrong in tone.”

“How did you know?”

François nodded towards a side table. “There’s her note.”

Dampierre found it amongst a litter of brushes and palettes.

“Yes,” he said glancing over it, “she says the same thing to me. She
feels she wants a change, so she’s shut up the house for a time, and
she’ll stay in Paris possibly on her way elsewhere. That’s all she
tells me.”

“The old lady must have left her some money,” observed François, still
apparently engrossed with his background. “Looks as though it’s rather
more than enough to keep body and soul together, doesn’t it?”

“Oh, do shut up, and leave that damned picture alone, and be
sympathetic!” exclaimed René, irritably.

His eyes were bright, and he laughed rather excitedly.

“I know you’re sick she’s coming. But I can’t stand your wisdom any
longer. I’m glad, do you hear? Glad. Glad. _Glad!_ And there’s an end
of it.”

“Pardon me, but that’s just what it’s not,” returned Fontenelle.

“Very well then, it isn’t. And I don’t care. I only know I want to see
her again,--horribly. And she’ll be here to-night, thank goodness, and
I’m going to meet her at the station.”

François shrugged his shoulders, and continued to paint.

“Where’s her hotel? Oh, the Impérial. She’s got that out of Baedeker.”
He laughed.

“Come now, François. Own that sweet Anne Page in Paris will be rather
nice!”

“You’d better ask her to tea here to-morrow. Your place is even more
of a pig-sty than mine. We shall see Dacier and Thouret at the _Lilas_
this evening. We can ask them then.”

“All right. But I’m not going to have you about all the time mind!”

“You won’t,” returned his friend briefly. “I can’t stand fools.”

René’s face darkened for a moment, but the retort died on his lips.

“Look here, old man,” he urged. “Don’t be a beast. I’m serious.”

“_Tant pis_,” was François’ implacable reply.

But when next day Anne was actually in his studio, and he heard her
voice, and saw her smile, and listened to the laughing clamour around
her, as she sat in the only armchair that was not broken, and drank
execrable tea out of a cup which did not match its saucer, it was
difficult even for Fontenelle to be anything but gay and pleased.

With an odd mixture of sensations, he noticed how fair her skin looked
against her black dress. The fur she wore on her shoulders was also
exceedingly becoming. François, who as a painter of many women’s
portraits knew something of the cost of feminine apparel, looked at it
with a certain surprise. Either the old lady had been fairly generous,
or Anne in her one day’s shopping, had been disgracefully extravagant.
In either case the result was admirable. He emerged from his
reflections to find a furious discussion raging as to which restaurant
she should be taken to dine.

“_Café de la Régence_,” said François authoritatively, “and afterwards
we’ll drive back to the _Lilas_.”

       *       *       *       *       *

It was several days before Anne found herself alone with René.

He came to her hotel one morning, and carried her off to lunch with him
at a little restaurant in the neighbourhood of his studio.

“You have such a devoted body-guard, that I never get a word with you,”
he complained. “And I want you to see my pictures. We must get in
before the light goes. It gets so confoundedly dark in the afternoons
now.”

Later on in the great gaunt studio at the top of the pile of
buildings in the Rue Notre Dame des Champs, Anne stood before some
of the pictures which in after years were to fetch great sums from
art collectors, which were to be discussed by connoisseurs, to be
execrated, loved, praised, condemned, admired.

She did not see them. For her at the moment, they were non-existent.

One thing only was in her mind; one idea, and that in the form of a
question.

How should she accomplish what she had come to do?

This was the first time René had deliberately sought her alone, and
in the circumstance, without malice, she divined the influence of
François Fontenelle.

He had meant to be careful. He had meant to see her only in the
presence of others, but,--she knew him so well that she could have
smiled,--to-day he had thrown prudence to the wind.

Tenderness was in his voice, in his eyes, even while he kept tender
words from his lips.

It grew dusk while she lingered. The blue of twilight filled the
windows, and a ruddy gleam from the stove lay along the floor. Anne sat
down on the couch, and René settled cushions at her back.

His hand touched her arm, and for a moment it rested there, before he
turned abruptly away.

Earlier in the day, Anne had spoken of returning to Dymfield.

“You mustn’t go yet,” he broke out all at once. “You won’t leave Paris
yet?”

The words were an appeal, and his voice was not steady.

“I came to see you,” said Anne deliberately.

He turned to her sharply. It was too dark to see his face, but she
heard the anxiety in his tone.

“All of us--or me?”

“To see you.”

He threw himself on his knees beside her. “Anne,” he whispered, “stay.
I want you. Will you marry me?”

He had taken her hands and was holding them tight against his breast.

“No, René.”

The words were decisive, but she made no effort to release herself, and
her hands rested quietly in his.

“Sit here, beside me,” she said, moving a little on the couch. “I want
to talk to you.”

Wondering at something in her voice, he obeyed in silence, and she went
on speaking, still very quietly.

“I won’t marry you, dear, because I’m too old for you. I will never
marry you. But if you want me, I will stay.”

In his amazement, he let her hands drop, and bent forward to see her
face.

Quite quietly, Anne got up. “It’s very dark,” she said. “I’ll light the
candles. I saw where you put the matches.”

He watched her in a sort of stupor as she went to a side table for the
matches, and lighted one after another of the candles in a sconce on
the opposite side of the room.

Did she know what she had said? Had he understood her?

He sat staring at her as she reached up to the sconce, the movement
throwing into relief the lines of her beautiful figure.

When the last candle was lighted, she turned to him smiling.

“No. You haven’t misunderstood me,” she said. “Now you can see my face
you will know you have not.”

She came swiftly across the room, and sat down beside him.

“Listen, René. I will not marry you, for many reasons. Two months ago I
was prepared never to see you again. But things have altered. I haven’t
told you yet, but all my circumstances have changed. I’m a rich woman
now, and my life is my own, to do what I like with it. And because I
love you, I propose to give it to you, for a little while at least. As
long as you want me. Until----”

Her voice, quite calm and quiet at first, broke at the last words, and
she paused abruptly.

René sprang to his feet, and drew her quickly up from the sofa into his
arms.

“Anne!” he cried. “Sweet Anne Page!” the words came brokenly between
tremulous laughter. “You don’t know what you’re saying. You will marry
me, of course, because we love each other, because----”

She put one hand on his shoulder, and so kept him at arm’s length.

“I will never marry you,” she repeated. “If you won’t consent to let me
stay as I suggest, I shall say good-bye to you now, and I will not see
you again.

“Remember René, you’re not talking to a girl. You’re dealing with a
woman who knows her own mind, and will have this or nothing. If I stay
we both have perfect freedom. I am old enough to do what I please with
my life. And I please to do this. René,” for the first time the colour
came to her cheeks, and her eyes wavered, “you’ll make me shy if I have
to ask you so many times to let me stay.”

She looked suddenly so like a child as she spoke, that in spite of his
perplexed amazement, Dampierre smiled.

He kissed her soft hair, and then her lips. “You’re adorable,” he
murmured. “But you amazing woman, you’re an _enfant terrible_! What am
I to do with you?”

“Don’t you see how simple it is?” she asked. “I’m rich now, so I can
stay as long as you--as long as I please.” She altered the pronoun
hurriedly. “And you have plenty of money, too, René, haven’t you? I
mean that we are each quite independent. It makes it all so easy.”

He laughed again as the only expression of his otherwise inexpressible
emotions.

She was as guileless, as simple as a child. Yet she was
proposing----Good God, what was she not proposing? And above all she
meant what she proposed; meant it absolutely. He looked into her eyes,
and knew that no words of his would move her.

“But Anne, Anne!” he stammered. “You’re saying awful things. Not
from my point of view, but as an Englishwoman. _Mon Dieu!_ as an
Englishwoman with the fear of Mrs. Grundy if not the fear of God before
her eyes!”

She looked at him, and his words, which amazement and uncertainty had
made flippant, died before the sadness of her glance.

“You don’t understand,” she said. “Nobody troubles about me. Nobody
has ever troubled. I have never been happy all my life. And now when
I could have happiness without hurting any one, why must I give it up
because of a world in which I have no concern?” She paused a moment,
and looked at him uncertainly.

“You think I ought to feel I’m doing wrong? Perhaps I ought. But I
_don’t_ feel it, René. I should be doing wrong if I married you,
because----” She left the sentence unfinished, forbearing to tell him
that he would some day thank her for his freedom.

“Don’t argue about it,” she said, smiling, though her eyes were full
of tears. “It’s my last word. If you won’t agree, I shall go back to
Dymfield to-morrow.”

“No. Don’t let us waste time now, at any rate,” he exclaimed eagerly.
“We shall have plenty of time to talk and argue. Just now I’m too
absurdly happy!”

He drew her down beside him on the sofa, and covered her eyes with
kisses.

“Anne! do you know what a sweet thing you are? No, of course you don’t
know, and that’s what make you so delicious!”

Even while she thrilled from head to foot with an almost unbearable
happiness, Anne remembered the price at which it was bought, and told
herself that it was not too dear.

“I only know I’m happy,” she whispered. “But I’m afraid of waking up
and finding it’s a dream.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Again and again, through the years as they passed, her own words came
back to her.

In the summer evenings at Dymfield, she thought of them. When she
travelled, they often came to her as she stood before some picture in
church or gallery. She thought of them sometimes at night, when on
some Italian terrace she sat watching the sunset.

To-day she remembered them, as she walked home through the sunshine,
and mounted the stately Spanish steps towards her apartment on the
heights.

“Twenty years ago!” She repeated the words to herself in wonder.

“It was a beautiful dream, and thank God, I never waked.”




XVI


Dr. Dakin was spending the night in town on his way to Paris.

For the previous fortnight, urged not so much by the impressive hints
concerning his duty thrown out by Mrs. Carfax, as by a curious change
in his wife’s letters to him, he had been on thorns of impatience to
join her in Paris, and bring her home.

The serious illness of a patient, an exasperating case which always
seemed on the point of mending, only to sink into another relapse, kept
him prisoner.

Not till the previous day had he considered it safe to telegraph for
the doctor he had engaged to look after his practice during his own
absence, and a still further delay had been occasioned by the necessity
of meeting this man in London to explain the peculiar nature of the
case under treatment.

Leaving his hotel in the evening, he walked westward in search of a
place to dine, meditating in a troubled fashion as he walked. His
wife had been away more than three months, and he had made no effort
to recall her. The visit, accepted ostensibly at least, partly on the
ground of her health, was in any case to have been a long one. Then
followed the plea of the cure which a certain well-known physician
had prescribed, and again her husband had agreed to her wishes. He
told himself to be patient. After his talk with Miss Page, he had been
full of hope. But it would not do to annoy Madge by bringing her home
again before she wished to come. It would be wiser to let her tire
of Paris, and then when she returned, he would take the advice of a
wise and charming woman, and perhaps there might yet be happiness for
Madge,--and for him too.

So he had waited, forcing himself to self-control through his hourly
longing for her.

At first, for many weeks, her letters were discouraging;--hurried and
indifferent. She was enjoying Paris. She felt better, or not so well.
They were the letters of a woman who writes perfunctorily, from a sense
of duty. Quite lately they had altered, and though the change in them
filled him with delight, it was joy mingled with uneasiness. They were
hysterical letters, composed of vague self-reproaches about her selfish
neglect of him, mingled with terms of endearment, and assertions of
her own unworthiness.

Fatal letters to write to a man who possessed a trace of cynicism, or
of what is commonly called knowledge of the world, but to the simple
mind of her husband, they suggested only alarming fears for her bodily
health. He must go and fetch her home immediately. Poor little Madge!
In the midst of his anxiety, he was not insensible of a thrill of joy
at the thought that from whatever cause, her heart had turned to him.

With this thought in his mind, he again dismissed as an impertinence, a
letter he had lately read containing more than a hint that his wife’s
protracted stay in Paris was due to a certain bad influence exercised
upon her in the past.

He had never considered the matter seriously, yet as he entered the
dining-room a moment later, the whole circumstance of the letter and
its accusation, was recalled by the sight of a face he remembered.

He had turned into a restaurant in the Haymarket, to which on their
rare visits to town, he had once taken Madge to dine.

With the sentimental idea at which he scarcely smiled, of finding the
exact place they had on that occasion occupied, he went upstairs, and
was glad to find the table in the corner disengaged. He had given his
order to the waiter, before seated at some little distance across the
room, he saw the man he recognized.

For the moment he was puzzled, then like a flash came the memory of a
dinner party at Fairholme Court six months ago, and with it in a flood
the further memory of other things he had for the moment forgotten.

Monsieur Fontenelle apparently did not see him, but apart from the fact
that he had liked him, Dr. Dakin was quite determined to recall their
previous meeting to his consciousness.

Madge had sometimes mentioned him in letters. If he had recently come
from Paris, he would have news of her. He left his place and crossed to
his neighbour’s table, with outstretched hand.

“We met at a very pleasant little dinner at Fairholme Court, some
months ago,” he began. “My name is Dakin. I expect you’ve forgotten it.
Yours is a name one can’t forget.”

Fontenelle gave him a hasty glance; then took the hand he offered, with
a charming smile.

“But of course! When Miss Page was our hostess. Have you heard from her
lately? I am told she is coming back.”

“Won’t you come to my table, as we have neither of us begun to feed?”
suggested Dr. Dakin. “It’s quieter there. Out of the draught.”

“Delighted!” François assured him.

The change was effected.

“I can give you the latest news of your wife,” he said almost before
he was seated. “I saw her only yesterday. I called in fact to make my
farewells.”

“How is she?” inquired the doctor anxiously. It was the one question
that concerned him.

“Not altogether well, I fancy. A little homesick. Paris possibly a
little on her nerves.”

He took up the wine list. “Can we agree as to wine?”

The doctor made a hasty gesture. “Anything you like. I’m on my way to
bring her home,” he observed.

Fontenelle, who was giving the waiter elaborate directions about
warming the Burgundy he had selected, did not at once reply.

When the man had hurried off with a _Bien Monsieur!_ he looked at his
companion.

“You are going to fetch her you say? Good! I think all she wants
is the rest and quiet of your charming village. Paris is not the
place for nervous women, doctor. The atmosphere is too exciting--too
distracting.” He made a little comprehensive gesture with both hands.

“But you don’t think she’s ill?”

In spite of himself, in spite of his British horror of displaying
emotion, the doctor’s voice shook a little.

“_Mais non! Mais non. Rien de tout_,” returned his companion, with a
reassuring smile. “Madame is suffering a little from her ‘cure.’ That
is only to be expected. Pardon!” he laughed genially. “For the moment I
forgot I was not speaking to a layman.”

The doctor laughed also, and tried to forget that the mere mention of
his wife’s name had set his heart beating.

He applied himself to his dinner.

“Did I understand that you’re going to leave Paris for long?” he asked.
“I think you said you had been to say good-bye to Madge--to my wife?”

“I’m really uncertain,” returned François, regarding him with keen
smiling eyes. “I’m over here on business connected with the exhibition
to which your countrymen with more politeness than discretion have
elected me President. After that?” He shrugged his shoulders with a
characteristic gesture. “I don’t know. A journey to Egypt, perhaps. But
that depends on circumstances. Did I tell you that Miss Page is coming
home? She may even be in Paris by this time. Mrs. Dakin is evidently
looking forward to seeing her.”

For a moment the doctor was silent.

“Miss Page is an old friend of yours--a great friend?” he asked
suddenly.

“I think I may say my best and dearest friend.”

At the mention of Anne’s name an imperceptible change crept into his
manner. An undercurrent of irony, too subtle for his companion’s
apprehension, vanished from his voice and from his words, which were
grave and deliberate.

“I might with truth repeat what you have said,” returned the doctor
slowly.

He took up his knife and fork, and absently replaced them on his plate,
into which he stared, as though lost in thought.

“And so,” said François, watching him, “you are naturally indignant
about a certain story----”

The other man looked up quickly.

“I know all about it,” Fontenelle went on. “Madame Didier, who belongs
to a certain feminine type indigenous to every country, has worked
with great industry, and Fortune has favoured her. During her visit to
England, she came across a certain Mrs. Crosby, the wife of old Mrs.
Burbage’s nephew.”

He paused, and critically tasted the wine which the waiter had just
poured into his glass.

“_Bon!_” he exclaimed appreciatively.

“This woman,” he continued, “convinced that her husband’s inheritance
was stolen from him by our friend, naturally paints her in the glaring
colours of an adventuress.”

Both men smiled.

“The character suits Anne Page, doesn’t it? At any rate it suited
Madame Didier, who with unfailing resource has patiently unearthed the
story of twenty years ago. This story, I understand, she has lost no
time in communicating to the wife of the vicar of your idyllic village,
whence having reached the fountain head, I imagine it is flowing in
refreshing streams through the entire county?”

“No,” returned the doctor quickly. “The vicar, whatever qualities he
may lack, happens to be a gentleman, and is moreover one of Miss Page’s
many friends. Fortunately this woman, Madame Didier, wrote to him, not
to Mrs. Carfax, and as the letter to some extent concerned my wife, he
brought it to me.”

Fontenelle gently raised his eyebrows, but refrained from comment.

“The vicar,” Dr. Dakin went on with a half smile, “is filled with
righteous indignation about what he naturally believes an impudent lie.
He has written to his correspondent, threatening pains and penalties
if she communicates with his wife, or tries in any way to spread the
scandal. He’s a wise man,” he added dryly. “Mrs. Carfax is not the
woman to be trusted with the reputation of her dearest friends.”

There was a moment’s silence.

“I didn’t tell him,” continued the doctor, “that I had previously heard
the story from my wife, who assures me it is true.”

François’s expression was inscrutable.

“And--pardon me--you, I imagine, regard the matter as, well let us say
as an Englishman?”

“If as I suppose I am to understand, you mean that I’m naturally a
hypocrite,” returned the doctor rather stiffly, “you are mistaken. Miss
Page is the best, the most generous woman I have ever met. Whatever her
life may have been, that is the result. The rest doesn’t concern me.”

A sudden light sprang into the other man’s eyes.

“I beg your pardon,” he said simply, in a tone of sincerity.

He looked round the room which was now hot, crowded, and noisy with the
clink of glasses, and the babel of talk.

“Have you anything to do this evening? If not, will you come round to
my club where we can smoke in peace?”

“I should like nothing better,” returned Dr. Dakin.




XVII


“I’m going to tell you the story of Anne Page as I know it,”
said Fontenelle, as they sat in a corner of the almost deserted
smoking-room. “You may hear all sorts of versions, and I should like
you to listen now to the true one.”

He smiled, as he lighted a cigarette.

“You, also, are a student of psychology, doctor, and it has always
seemed to me that Anne Page is a singularly interesting study.

“Nowadays in this age of modern thought, perhaps I should rather say in
this age of fads and cranks, through which men and women are groping
towards a different conception of life, her conduct would not have been
so amazing.

“If she had been a modern woman, filled with the latest ideas of the
sanctity of passion, whatever that may mean; the duty of leading her
own life, and so forth, one might class her with a number of earnest
feminine enthusiasts whose brains, like the old bottles of Scripture,
are unequal to the strain of the new wine of recent ideas.”

“She doesn’t fit in _there_,” returned the doctor, smiling.

“Think of it!” exclaimed François with sudden animation. “A simple
gentle woman of twenty years ago. A woman who had led the narrowest
of lives; ignorant of men; ignorant of passion--till at the age of
thirty-seven she falls in love, and is loved by a man ten years younger
than herself. And that man, René Dampierre.”

The doctor started. “You mean the painter?”

François nodded. “She was his mistress for three years.”

Both men smoked in silence for a few moments.

“One might have guessed,” said the doctor quietly, “that she would
choose a lover worthy of her.”

“Anne is an unconscious artist,” returned Fontenelle. “It was the most
beautiful love affair I have ever known. The only perfect one--thanks
to her courage and self-sacrifice.

“Anne is a simple woman in the sense that all her emotions are
unsophisticated, original, generous. But she is also the wisest woman I
ever met.

“She knew René better than he knew himself. That is to say, she knew
men--or rather divined their natures, by her sixth sense of intuition.

“She might have married him. He wanted to marry her. But she knew what
the result would be.

“Oh, René was not a brute,” he exclaimed in answer to his companion’s
sudden movement. “Far from it. Except for his genius, he was the
average kindly natured man. But Anne very wisely took his genius into
account. He was not the man to marry, and she knew it. She is proud, as
only a woman of her type can be proud. And then--here felt the artist
in life--this was her first and last passion, the only vital emotion
she had ever experienced in an existence otherwise incredibly grey,
incredibly monotonous. She wanted to make it a perfect memory for
herself, as well as for him.”

He paused a moment, throwing back his head against the padded chair,
while he watched the rings of smoke he was blowing.

“And so,” he went on presently, “she made a resolve which few
women would have found the courage either to make, or what is more
important--to keep. She determined to stay with him only while his
first passion lasted. She made up her mind to go even before the first
cloud was in the sky,--at any rate before it was visible to _him_.
Women have keener eyes than men for rising clouds.”

The doctor was silent. “Rightly or wrongly,” he went on, “she felt that
only in this way, only by running no risk of injuring either him or his
career, she was justified in taking her little measure of happiness.
She knew him very well,” he added meditatively. “René was as weak as
most of us, weaker than some perhaps, where women are concerned. He
would have been unfaithful, but he could never take his unfaithfulness
callously. He would have been torn perpetually between his desires, and
his dread of hurting her. And his work would have suffered terribly.
Anne was right to go.”

“You speak as an artist,” remarked the doctor drily.

“I can speak in no other way,” returned François. “René Dampierre was a
great man with a definite work to do.”

“But Dampierre,--René Dampierre?” The doctor uttered the name with
respect. “He must have died soon afterwards, surely?”

“Eighteen months afterwards. But not, I regret to tell you, of a broken
heart.”

François placed the end of his cigarette in the ash-tray before him,
and ground it to powder. His smile was a curious blend of sadness and
irony.

“It was an accident, wasn’t it?”

“Yes. The result of a fall from his horse. He was riding at Chantilly.”

“And you mean that----?”

“That Anne was right to go. She knew the woman before René himself
guessed the truth. She suffered I know, or perhaps as I _don’t_ know.
But not so horribly, I think, as they would both have suffered if she
had stayed. And she made her exit with dignity.” He smiled again. “I am
a Frenchman, doctor, and I suppose the love of _le beau geste_ is in my
blood. I take off my hat to Anne Page.”

When Dr. Dakin spoke, it was in a voice from which he could not banish
indignation.

“It seems incredible! That he could forget a woman like that, I mean.”

His own faithful nature rose up in revolt at the outrage to all his
sentiments of enduring love.

“He didn’t,” returned François quickly. “Anne had no real rival. She
may rest in peace. Fate was kind to her--and perhaps to him,” he added.
“Their love while it lasted, was perfect, and death settled the future.
You are thinking that if any woman was worthy of fidelity it was
Anne Page? I agree with you. But when a woman late in life falls in
love with a genius----” he made a gesture with his hand, and left the
sentence unfinished.

“Tragic, doctor, I admit. But it’s life,--and Anne knew and accepted
it.”

The faint irony which he could seldom keep out of his voice, was almost
submerged by something that sounded like real emotion.

“You knew them both very well, of course?” asked Dr. Dakin, after quite
a long silence. “When they were together, I mean.”

“I was with them nearly every evening, when they entertained all the
men best worth knowing, in Paris. It must have struck you that Anne is
a woman of unusual mental distinction?”

“She is a very brilliant woman.”

“That is easily discernible when, as with you, she has a chance of real
conversation. She has naturally a keen quick mind, and she learnt to
talk in a very admirable school.

“The evenings at the flat in the Rue de Fleurus are still remembered in
Paris.”

He smiled to himself, as though in thought he had gone back to those
evenings.

“I wish I could put before you doctor, the charm of their home
life. There has been nothing like it since. That sounds terribly
middle-aged, doesn’t it? I realize that I’m growing old, when I think
of the society of twenty years ago, as incredibly brilliant and
fascinating.

“At any rate it was composed of the men and women who have since made
their mark on our age. They are well known names, at any rate to a man
like you who interests himself in our countrymen as well as in your own.

“Among the painters there were Giroux, and Bussières, and Deslon. All
men associated with the Impressionist movement. Thouret the novelist,
and Dacier the poet, were intimate friends. They met Anne first at
Fairholme Court, with me, and they were always devoted to her. Then
there was Matignon the critic, a fine old man, who adored her. And
Bellet, and Courtois--I could go on quoting indefinitely. They had a
flat in the Rue de Fleurus, beautiful as only Anne knows how to make
a home beautiful. It overlooked the Luxembourg gardens, and was close
to my present studio. I remember it always full of sunshine, and I can
see Anne arranging the flowers, (every room was full of flowers), and
looking up from them to laugh.

“She was so radiantly happy it was a joy to see her. And she grew so
beautiful. She learnt to dress, of course. Beautiful dress is one of
her instincts, as you see even now. What a hostess she was! She became
the fashion in our set,--René’s and mine. The men raved about her.
They found _piquante_, that touch of English shyness and modesty which
she combines so oddly with dignity. She held a real salon, and a very
brilliant one too, in the Rue de Fleurus. Those were her _beaux jours_.”

“I can imagine it,” said the doctor.

“That sort of _ménage_ is only possible in Paris,” observed François.
“Even there, it’s not without its difficulties. But she surmounted them
by her very unconsciousness and simplicity. Some of the women even,
were won over. One or two of the wives of men in René’s circle were
her intimate friends. They went to her as we all did, for advice and
sympathy.”

“Just as we all go now to be consoled,” put in Dr. Dakin.

“Precisely. And one of the secrets of her power of drawing confidence,
is that Anne is by nature a maternal woman--a mother.”

“That’s the pity of it.”

“I agree. Life hasn’t given her everything. But at least it gave her
three unforgetable years, and a memory which has kept her sweet and
fresh and young as in her girlhood she could never have been.”

“And she went away,” said the doctor gently, “in the midst of her
happiness?”

“She went away quietly, simply, with no fuss, as she does everything.
With no farewell scene, or anything of that sort. She left him a
letter, and with me, a message. The hardest I ever had to deliver in my
life.”

Fontenelle got up, and threw the end of his cigarette into the fire.

“And then she travelled?”

“For years. When they were together, she and Dampierre went to Italy
every spring. I believe she has gone over all the old ground since
then. She seems to have gone half over Europe as well. I used to get
letters from Athens, from Constantinople, from Naples, Rome, Florence.
Fortunately she was a rich woman, able to work off her restlessness.”

He laughed a little. “That was one of her adorable simplicities.
It never occurred to her that the possession of a fortune made any
difference to the situation. She only looked upon it as a means of
independence and freedom when her happiness should come to an end. And
she was right. René never thought of it either. In some ways he was as
childlike and as unworldly a creature as she. He had inherited a fairly
good income from his father. He would not have known what to do with
more. That’s Anne Page’s story, doctor. I don’t know how it strikes an
Englishman, but to me it seems rather a wonderful one because of the
type of woman to whom it belongs.”

“Yes,” returned Dr. Dakin meditatively. “One would have thought that
convention, or religious prejudice----”

Fontenelle laughed. “She is untouched by either. _C’est un vrai
caractère, cette chère Anne Page!_ Until she came to Paris, she hadn’t
mixed enough with the world even to _know_ its conventions. Religion?
Well, ‘by their fruits ye shall know them,’ and if the fruits of the
Spirit are faith and hope, and the charity which suffers long and is
kind, there never was a woman who has more absolutely attained the
results of religion. It’s not a satisfactory result for the moralist, I
admit,” he added.

“But in this very interesting and amazing world, the moralists don’t
have it all their own way,” observed the doctor.

“So far as creeds and dogmas are concerned, Anne is a born pagan. It
is not that she has examined and rejected them. They simply don’t
appeal to her nature. When as young men we first met her, we called her
_Flora_, amongst ourselves. She struck us even then as a curious blend
of Madonna and goddess. And the physical appearance has a mental and
moral parallel. I remember once when I wanted to tease her, I asked
what had become of her religion.

“She looked at me with those childlike eyes of hers and said:

“‘I never had any,--in the sense you mean. By being with René I’m not
hurting any one. And it’s only by hurting people one does wrong.’

“Then--I admit it was cruel of me, but I was curious--I said that some
people had refrained from doing what she had done, for the sake of
example to humanity. Her reply was ‘But apart from religion, people
haven’t yet decided what _is_ the right way to arrange their lives.’”

Dr. Dakin smiled. “In view of the modern ferment of opinion, she was
right there.”

François pushed his chair back, with a movement of impatience.

“Well now what’s to be done? The tale of her incredibly evil past will
spread I suppose, and Dymfield will become impossible.”

He laughed rather savagely.

“It’s quite an amusing notion that scandal should attack a gentle woman
of Anne’s age. Yet I imagine that few of the natives of a village
possess a sense of humour.”

“I don’t think the story will spread. The vicar as I told you is
absolutely incredulous, and no one else has heard it.”

“Except Madame?” hinted François. “I don’t wish to suggest an
unkindness. But women, you understand? A whisper to a dear
friend--_hein_?”

“My wife is devoted to Miss Page,” said the doctor shortly. “I shall
warn her; but she will be indignant at the mere suggestion of betrayal.”

“_Parfaitement!_” returned François with a bow. “Pardon me. You will
probably find Miss Page in Paris,” he added. “She was expected to-day.”

“So much the better. It will be a great pleasure.”

The doctor rose. “Good-night,” he said, extending his hand cordially.
“And thank you for this talk. Perhaps if you decide not to go to Egypt,
you will do us the honour of staying with us a little later, when my
wife comes back? Our friendship for Miss Page makes a bond between us,”
he added, in his pleasant sincere voice.

François met his eyes for an instant. They were full of the kindliness
and instinctive liking he felt for the man he was addressing.

“A thousand thanks. But I think I am almost certain to go to Egypt.”

“Another time then. I shall only say _au revoir_.”

François followed him into the hall, and watched him step into a
hansom, and give the address of his hotel to the driver.

When he turned away, there was a curious expression about his lips,
which presently deepened into a smile that was partly cynicism, partly
something else.

He was reflecting on the curious encounters liable to befall a man like
himself. He thought of the evening’s conversation, and smiled again
to think how completely till this moment he had failed to realize the
humour of its friendly nature.

“_C’est un honnête homme. Il ne méritait pas ça----_”

François dismissed the subject of Dr. Dakin’s deserts with a mental
shrug, as he went upstairs to his room, in which a bright fire was
burning.




XVIII


François drew up an armchair close to the blaze, and lighted his pipe.

His thoughts at first dwelt upon the man with whom he had just
parted--a loyal straight, good fellow if ever there was one,
he decided. The verdict was accompanied by a greater sense of
self-dissatisfaction, a sensation nearer to shame and regret that he
had for years experienced.

It was an uncomfortable attitude of mind, and with characteristic
love of ease, he hastened to obliterate it, by turning his attention
elsewhere.

His conversation with the doctor had conjured up so many mental
pictures of the past, that he scarcely knew which of them to examine
first.

The salon in Anne Page’s flat, rose before him. With the retentive
memory of a painter, François recalled minutely every detail of the
charming room.

He saw the deep-red curtains drawn across the three windows, the
rose-coloured carpet, the lights shining like stars between the
flowers. He saw Anne standing near the table at which coffee was
served, receiving her guests with her lovely smile, and eager words of
welcome.

He remembered to the smallest detail of lace and trimming, a dress
she often wore in the evening, a gown of purple silk which suited so
admirably, her hair and the soft whiteness of her neck.

Giroux and Bussières were talking to her, and he watched with amusement
their excited faces, and vehement gestures.

It was the evening after René had shown his new pictures.

There had been a crowd of his friends in the studio all the afternoon;
a crowd of eager interested men and women, standing before the canvases
now so well known, so greatly prized.

Bussières and Giroux he knew were talking of the latest picture, his
masterpiece--the famous picture of the lady in the green dress, leaning
back upon the sofa.

François looked round the room already filled with people.

He saw the white head of Matignon the critic, towering above the rest.
He saw the dark alert face of Thouret bent towards Madame Valory, the
painter of pastels delicate and fragile as herself. He saw Courtois the
sculptor, in animated discussion with Bellet the new poet of audacities
in rhythm. He heard René’s sudden amused laugh, and turned to look at
him, as he moved from one group to the other, a little flushed and
excited, his fair hair ruffled, his slim yet athletic figure suggesting
the Englishman of sport and open-air pastimes, rather than the
brilliant French painter he had even then become.

Conspicuous among the crowd was the lady whose portrait he had recently
painted.

Blanche Aubriot was the wife of an elderly _roué_, who regarded her
very pronounced flirtations with an indifference equal to that which
she on her side extended towards his infidelities.

She was a beautiful young woman of two or three and twenty, childless,
soulless, and much admired.

To-night she wore the green dress of the picture, and held her court
with her usual piquante vivacity.

François regarding the scene with critical and observant eyes, noticed
how frequently her glance wandered in René’s direction, and with
amusement, her oft-repeated efforts to attract his attention.

His own eyes turned again to Anne, where she stood surrounded by
friends, laughing and talking.

He watched her to-night with peculiar admiration.

Curiously enough Dampierre had never painted her.

Once soon after they had settled in their apartment, François had
spoken of it as a foregone conclusion.

“She’s just your type--the essentially feminine type of woman.”

Greatly to his surprise, René shook his head.

“_C’est impossible_,” he said conclusively.

François wondered, but the conversation turned immediately upon other
matters, and it was only just before he took leave, when Anne was out
of the room, that his friend took a book from one of the shelves, and
turning over the leaves, handed it to him at an open page.

“That’s why I can’t paint her,” he said.

The poem he touched with his forefinger was Browning’s song beginning--

    “_Nay, but you who do not love her,
     Is she not pure gold, my mistress?_”

François read it aloud, and came to the last few lines--

    “_Then why not witness, calmly gazing,
     If earth holds aught--speak truth--above her?
     Above this tress, and this, I touch
     But cannot praise, I love so much!_”

“For _praise_, read _paint_,” said René, taking the book and closing
it. “It’s the same thing. You’re the man to paint her. Ask her to sit
for you.”

François had always delayed to avail himself of the suggestion.

To-night he determined to delay no longer. Crossing the room, he joined
the little group round Anne, and presently drew her away.

“I haven’t had a word with you this evening,” he said. “And now you
must give me one, or even two. About that portrait. I think the time
has come. When will you sit for me?”

Even at the moment, he was struck by the curious expression which
crossed her face.

When afterwards he tried to analyze it, he could only think of the face
of a woman who expecting a signal of some sort, had heard, and accepted
it.

“When would you like me to come?” she asked.

She was standing at the end of the room by the fire, and as she raised
her eyes, François saw in them the look which did not escape him when
he came to paint them.

They discussed the matter for a few moments. Various engagements on
both sides postponed the first sitting for a fortnight, but a day was
finally arranged.

“How long will it take?” asked Anne.

He made a gesture of ignorance. “I don’t know. A month perhaps, with
luck. But this is going to be my masterpiece, Anne. I shall succeed, or
perish in the attempt. Have you got that flowered gown you used to wear
in the garden at Dymfield? I suppose not. Yes? _Très bien!_ Bring it, I
want to try an effect.”

He was interrupted by René, who came up at the moment, and laid his
hand lightly on Anne’s arm.

“I want you to go and talk to Matignon, dear,” he said in a low voice.
“He’s always bad tempered if you don’t pay him enough attention. Go and
make love to the old boy.”

A vague uneasiness passed from François’s mind at the sound of his
friend’s voice, always gentle when he spoke to Anne. It was even
gentler than usual now, and he did not fail to notice the caress of his
hand on her sleeve, nor the look of happy understanding between them,
as she moved away, smiling, to obey him.

“I’m arranging for her to come and pose. I’m going to begin the picture
at once,” he said.

“_Bon!_” returned René, his face lighting up. “You’ve taken your time
about it.”

“One hesitates to begin one’s masterpiece,” François retorted. “You who
do nothing else, except finish them, ought to have compassion on the
weaker brethren.”

René made a laughing gesture of menace.

“_Allons, mes amis ... mais calmez-vous donc!_” exclaimed Blanche
Aubriot at his elbow.

François looked down at her white shoulders, and experienced a
momentary feeling of repugnance which passed into self-ridicule, for
glancing at her indolent brown eyes soft as velvet, at her full red
lips, at her glossy hair, he acknowledged her beauty.

“Come and talk to me, Monsieur René,” she urged with the insistence of
a spoilt child. “You’re a great man, I know, but the lion condescends
to the mouse sometimes, doesn’t he?”

François followed them with his eyes as they moved away together.

“If she had said _cat_, I should have found no difficulty in reversing
the parts,” was his inward reflection.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fire had died down, but as he sat before the smouldering ashes,
François was very far in space and time from the club bedroom in which
he was dreaming.

He was passing through successive stages of satisfaction and despair,
hope and baffling discouragement, while he painted Anne’s portrait.
After the first fortnight, she came every day, and every day she was
more silent.

He remembered this afterwards. At the time, engrossed heart and soul
in his picture, he did not notice her quietude. He was only half
consciously perplexed by a subtle difference in her expression which
he found hard to reconcile with his previous impression of her--a
difference which was at once his inspiration, and his despair.

“If only I can get that, I shall paint a great picture!” he exclaimed
one day involuntarily, breaking a long silence.

“What?” asked Anne.

He started, forgetting that he had spoken aloud.

“I don’t know.”

She smiled a little. “Then I’m afraid you won’t get it.”

“But I _have_!”

He almost shouted the words, one afternoon a week afterwards, when she
had stood patiently almost as long as the daylight lasted.

She looked at him with inquiring eyes, as he threw down his brush.

“I won’t touch it again! It’s there! It’s all right. _Mon Dieu!_ Anne,
do you hear me? I’ve painted a great picture.”

He came towards the stand, both hands outstretched, and helped her down.

“Come and look before the light goes,” he urged. “Why Anne----” his
triumphant tone changed abruptly to consternation. “You’re not ill,
dear? You’re trembling so. What a brute I am! I’ve kept you posing too
long. I forgot. Come and sit in this chair. Here’s a cushion. I’ll get
you some water.”

She shook her head. “I’m all right,” she assured him, trying to smile.
“I want to see the picture.”

He turned the easel towards her, and she looked at it a long time in
silence.

“Do you like it?” asked François at last anxiously.

“It’s too good for me. It’s idealized,” she said. “But it’s the best
thing you’ve ever done, François. I congratulate you. You’re right.
It’s your masterpiece.”

He felt a warm glow of pleasure. Anne as he had often acknowledged was
an admirable critic, instinctively a connoisseur, and her life amongst
painters had trained and sharpened her natural perception. Secretly
François stood in greater awe of Anne’s verdict on his work, than on
that of many of his fellow-craftsmen.

“You have suggested all the Dymfield garden in those flowers,” she said
after another silence.

“In you,” he returned quickly, wondering at the tone in her voice.

“I’m going to give you this, Anne,” he went on, speaking gaily to
avert an uneasy fear. “I hope you appreciate the compliment. I lay my
masterpiece at your feet, and you can pick it up and hang it in your
salon, between the two long windows. That’s the place for it.”

She turned slowly from the picture, and her eyes met his, while she
shook her head.

“No,” said she in a low voice. “I can’t take it, François.”

“Why not?”

She leant back in her chair, and a smile so sad that involuntarily he
turned away, came creeping round her lips.

“Because I’m a woman,” she replied.

He made no reply. The meaning of her words did not escape him, but in a
moment she translated them.

“You’ve painted me at the end of my _beaux jours_,” she said. “Before
they are quite over--but at the end. I’m very grateful. But I couldn’t
live with that picture, it would be too----”

She did not finish the sentence.

“Besides,--there’s another reason,” she added after a further pause.

“What’s this?” asked François, suddenly taking a book from the table.
With a sort of blind haste, he strove to hinder her next words by
snatching at any pretext to arrest them.

“It’s a book you lent me, nearly three years ago, I’m ashamed to say.
When I first came to Paris. I’ve always forgotten to return it. But
to-day,” she paused as though her mind were wandering away from the
present. “To-day I remembered it.”

François took it up.

“_Mademoiselle de Maupin._ I forgot I’d ever lent it to you.”

“You remember the story?”

He nodded. “Of course.”

“It’s very different from my story, isn’t it? But the way she found,
I had already discovered for myself before I read the book. It’s the
right way. In my case, the only way.”

François had just lighted a cigarette. He threw it away with a sudden
jerk, and looked at her without speaking.

“I’m going to-morrow.”

Her voice was steady, but quite colourless.

“René,” stammered her friend, “René is going to-morrow?”

“Yes. Into the country for a few days, for the background of his new
picture.”

François drew up a chair, and sat down close to her.

“Anne,” he began gently, “There hasn’t been anything? Any...?”

She shook her head. “Nothing. But it’s coming. This has been in my mind
for weeks. It was there though I scarcely knew it, before you wanted me
to sit to you. When you asked me, I knew certainly.”

The spring twilight lingered in the studio, and he could still see her
face, white against the cushion he had put into the chair.

As he listened to her quiet low voice, all she was saying seemed to him
like the illusion of a dream.

_Anne_ to be talking of leaving René! It was an absurd hallucination on
his part--a trick of his imagination.

“But René?” he asked nevertheless. “He doesn’t know? Why, I saw him
early this morning, and he spoke of you----”

For the first time, her voice trembled, and he watched her slim hands
travelling aimlessly over the frills on her dress.

“He doesn’t know,” she said. “That’s why I’m telling you.” There was a
long silence, and he saw her fighting for composure.

“François,” she began at last in a whisper. “He won’t understand at
first. He’ll think me cruel, and wicked and inexplicable.” She caught
her breath, but went on bravely. “You are far sighted too. You know as
well as I do, the woman who will--who will----

“He doesn’t know it yet himself. He still loves me. Now, to-day. And
that’s why I’m going. I couldn’t bear.... He must be quite free. It was
only on those terms I agreed with myself to--to----” She was shivering
now from head to foot, and the words came in gasps like the words of
a dying woman. “It has lasted for three years, and I thought it might
only be three months. I have had quite ... quite a long life, François.”

He turned away so that he should not see her smile.

“I’m not going to be coward enough to spoil it--for both of us,” she
went on after minutes which seemed like hours. François had been
mechanically counting the strokes of the clock which ticked maddeningly
in the gloom. He had never noticed it before, and was seized with a
sudden mad desire to smash it into fragments.

“But I want you,--will you, François?--in a little while, when he will
listen, to say what you can for me?”

He got up, and began to walk about the room, stumbling against the
chairs in the way.

At last he turned abruptly, and stood before her.

“Must you, Anne?” His voice was an entreaty. It shook almost as much as
her own.

She got up slowly, and gave him both hands.

“Good-bye, François.”

He held them close, without speaking.

“I shall write to you,” she said, “--later on. I’m going to be a great
traveller. You will hear of me from--from all sorts of wonderful
places. And I shall see you again, my dear friend. But I don’t think I
shall ever see----” she stopped, and he felt her hands shaking in his.

“Anne!” he implored. “Don’t go.”

“Don’t say anything more,” she implored. “I have to get through the
evening. It’s our--last. So you see it must be quite--It must be quite
a happy----”

She stretched out a trembling hand for her cloak, and he wrapped it
round her, fastening it for her as though she were a child. Then he
took her downstairs, and called a closed _fiacre_.

In the darkness of the courtyard, by the door, he put his arm round her
shoulders, and taking both her hands in one of his, he kissed them.

They were wet with the tears she had tried to brush aside.




XIX


Two or three mornings before the conversation between Dr. Dakin and
François Fontenelle, Anne, the peaceful Anne of to-day, received by the
same post, three letters which interested her.

She knew the handwriting on the envelopes of each, and hastened first
to learn what her brother had to say. Hugh, as she had known for some
months, was returning to England.

His farm had prospered, and anxious to launch his sons, boys of sixteen
and eighteen, in the professions they had chosen, he had determined to
retire, and end his days in the old country.

The letter, an affectionate one, stated that he was already in London
where he had taken a furnished house, to give him and his wife time to
look round, and decide upon their future home.

Anne must come to see them the moment she returned. They were all
looking forward to her visit.

She put down the closely written pages with an air of content, and
turned smiling to the envelope inscribed in the large childish
characters which recalled Sylvia Carfax.

    “MY DEAREST DEAR MISS PAGE,

    “I _must_ write to you because I’m so happy and excited. I’ve
    got _splendid_ plans. Just yet, I can’t tell even _you_ what
    they are, because it’s a secret for the present. But it means
    a simply magnificent chance for me, and of course it has
    something to do with my work. Mother and father will be very
    angry, I’m afraid, but I can’t help it. It’s too good to lose,
    and one can’t sacrifice the whole of one’s future because of
    one’s parents. Besides later on, they will see how wise I’ve
    been. Oh dear Miss Page, _when_ are you coming back? I want
    to see you so much, because by that time everything will be
    settled, and I can tell you all about it. I’m too excited to
    write any more. Only I want you very badly. Do, _do_ come home
    soon.

    “Your ever loving
                      “SYLVIA.”

Anne returned the note to its envelope with a slightly worried look.

What folly was the child considering? She must write to her at once,
and insist upon a full explanation.

In the meantime she opened the other letter, which bore the Paris
stamp-mark, and was evidently from Madge Dakin. It was very short, and
very incoherent, but when Anne raised her head and let the lilac-tinted
paper slip from her hand, her face was rather white.

She was at breakfast in her sitting-room, whose window overlooked Rome.

The sunshine flooded the room, and the anemones, purple, white and
scarlet, in a bowl placed on the snowy cloth, glowed with the colour of
jewels.

The air was sweet with the scent of violets which almost covered a
small table near the open window, and outside, over-arching the city,
the Roman sky was gloriously, passionately blue.

Anne sat with her elbows on the table, her chin resting on her open
palms, lost in thought.

Suddenly she rose, and rang the bell.

“Burks,” she said when the maid appeared, “can you pack, and be ready
to start for Paris to-day?”

Burks stared. “But I thought we weren’t leaving for another month,
ma’am,” she gasped.

“I know. But I find it’s necessary to go at once. Can you manage it?”

The maid beamed with satisfaction. “It’ll be a rush, but I’ll do it,
ma’am, and be thankful. I’m about tired of foreigners,” she added,
alluding thus with a sniff of scorn to the Italian cook with whom she
lived on terms of ill-concealed warfare.

Anne smiled absently.

“Yes. You’ll be glad to get home, I dare say Burks, and Paris is
on the way. Please give me my writing things. I must put off all
my engagements, and write a hundred letters, so I don’t want to be
disturbed this morning.”

Left alone, Anne re-read the letter which had prompted her decision to
leave Rome at once. Short, hurried as it was, it conveyed the misery of
the writer better than pages of outpouring, and Anne did not need the
supplication contained in the last lines to lead her to any creature in
distress.

“Poor little soul! Poor wretched little thing!” she thought, before she
forced herself to attend to the lengthy correspondence which in view of
her large circle of Roman friends, such a hurried leave-taking entailed.

Unwilling to hinder Burks in her work of packing, she went herself to
post her letters, and to dispatch the telegram which warned Madge
Dakin of her arrival in Paris next day.

While she walked to the post-office, while she mingled with the crowds
in the street, and vaguely heard the cries of the flower vendors, the
cracking of whips, the babel of tongues, her thoughts were far away.
Her friend’s letter had told her nothing definite, but Anne guessed the
nature of her trouble.

Imperceptibly, from sadness and perplexity her expression became stern.
A passionate anger such as for years she had not experienced, grew
momentarily stronger.

“Always the same,” she repeated to herself. “Cruel, cynical. Too
light-minded to desire anything strongly. Selfish enough to gratify
every passing whim----” And then her thoughts received a sudden
disconcerting check.

What of the years of loyal friendship he had given her? How could she
forget his tenderness and sympathy at the bitterest moment of her life?
How ignore either, the many kindnesses difficult for a man wholly
cynical, impossible for one wholly selfish, which he had shown to the
down-trodden, the beaten, the unsuccessful in life’s struggle?

Once again, for the thousandth time she recognized the complexity of
every human being. The baffling contradictions; good interwoven with
evil, nobility with meanness, honour with disloyalty. It was the great
intricate puzzle of human nature she was once more considering; a
tangle which nothing but the cloak of infinite charity can cover. The
only cloak which glorifies and reveals what is good and strong, while
in pity, in despairing tenderness it hides under its ample folds, the
shame, the weakness, the ugly scars of the form it both shelters, and
defines.

Anne sighed as she reached the top of the Spanish steps, and leant on
the wall to take a last look at the city she loved.

Overhead, that “great inverted bowl we call the sky,” here, deeply
blue, surpassingly beautiful. Beneath it, the dancing sunshine playing
alike on dome and pinnacle, roof and tree, and on the thousands of
men and women in the busy streets. Men and women hiding within their
breasts incalculable heights and depths of virtue and vice, actual or
potential. Men and women soon to be covered by the earth on which they
walked, to make place for another, yet essentially the same swarm of
human beings between the same earth and sky, still asking the same
questions under the same sunshine, which laughed, and never replied.

It was the eternal puzzle, the old riddle to which through the ages no
solution has been found.

Anne sighed once more, and then smiled at the futility of considering
it again just now, when there was packing to be done.

_He maketh His sun to shine upon the just and upon the unjust._

The words slipped into her mind before she turned away, with a
momentary sensation of reassurance. At least the sunshine fell upon
every one alike. Perhaps it symbolized a cloak of charity wider and
larger than any woven by human minds.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Will Madame come upstairs?”

The maid re-entered the room in which Anne had been waiting, and then
preceded her up the staircase to a door which she threw open.

A little figure huddled over the fire, rose hastily as she entered, and
with incoherent words that sounded like a cry, threw herself into her
arms.

“Oh! You are good! You are good!” Madge repeated, hiding her eyes like
a child against the elder woman’s arm. “I should have _died_ if you
hadn’t come.”

When at last she drew herself away, and looked at her visitor, Anne had
to suppress a start of dismay.

She scarcely recognized Madge Dakin.

Her cheeks were white and sunken, and swollen with much crying. She
was pitifully thin, and her nervous hands strayed constantly about her
face. Her pretty hair, generally so carefully waved and tended, was
screwed into an untidy knot at the back of her head. She had evidently
not troubled to dress all day, for she wore a bedroom wrapper, whose
pink ribbons she had forgotten to tie and arrange.

“My dear child,” declared Anne, “you must give me some tea. I’m dying
for it, and I shall be speechless till I get it.”

“Oh! I’m so sorry. I make it myself generally. I--forgot it this
afternoon.”

Anne sat down in an armchair near the fire, and purposely allowed her
to put on the kettle, and make all the preparations alone.

A glance at the room, a fairly large one, from which a bedroom opened,
showed that her friend had probably done nothing but cry over the fire
for several days.

It was dusty, and littered with papers, books, working materials. It
looked untidy, and uncared for.

There were dead flowers in the vases, and the curtains half drawn,
obscured the already dying light of a dull day.

When the kettle began to boil, she rose, and gently pushed Madge into a
chair.

She made the tea herself, while in a sort of stupor of wretchedness,
Mrs. Dakin watched the movements of her white fingers.

“Now drink that, my child,” she said, putting the cup and saucer into
her hand.

“Have you had any lunch?”

Madge shook her head.

“Then you must eat a plateful of these excellent biscuits, and you must
begin at once.”

She proceeded to drink her own tea, talking about her journey, and the
slowness of the trains, till watching the face opposite to her she saw
a trace of colour in the cheeks.

“And now what is it, my dear?” she asked very gently, as Mrs. Dakin
pushed the cup away from her.

For answer, Madge burst into a flood of hopeless tears.

Anne leant forward and took her hand. “It’s François Fontenelle, isn’t
it?” she inquired.

Mrs. Dakin raised her head, her lips parted like a baby’s.

“How did you guess?” she whispered.

“Because I’ve known him for a great many years--very well.”

There was the faintest trace of bitterness in Anne’s tone. The sight
of the miserable bowed figure had revived some of her resentment.

With a quick movement, Madge left her chair, and knelt beside her,
hiding her face, with a childish gesture, while Anne’s arm went round
her as tenderly as a mother’s.

“I’m going to tell you everything,” she began in a half-choked voice.
“I’ve been so wicked, Miss Page, that I--I can’t believe it. Every
now and then I think it’s a dream.” She shivered in Anne’s grasp, and
sobbed a moment.

“It was my fault. I thought I was so bored. I thought I was tired of
Harry--of Harry who has always been a thousand times too good for me.
And so I--I flirted with him. Helen Didier says I threw myself at his
head. She’s a hateful woman, and I loathe her, but that’s true, I
did. He never cared for me. In my heart I knew he didn’t, even when I
led him on to make love to me. It was nothing but my wretched wicked
vanity. Just because I was bored. Just because----” Her voice sank, and
for a moment Anne heard nothing but the painful catching of her breath
in exhausted sobs.

“And the awful part was,” she stammered at last, “that _I_ didn’t care
either. I never meant it to be more than a flirtation. At least I
think I didn’t,” she added with a pitiful attempt at perfect honesty.
“But----” She stopped short.

“But it became more than that. He was your lover?”

She nodded her head, and then suddenly clasped Anne with convulsive
strength.

“And Harry’s coming to-morrow. And I’m a vile woman!”

She cried the words aloud in a panic of horror.

“Oh, Miss Page, what shall I do. What will become of me? what shall I
say to Harry? I shall go mad!”

Anne laid her cheek on the head that rested against her shoulder, and
was silent.

She understood what was passing in the soul of the weak, terror-struck
little woman. The horror of outraged conventions, the nightmare
conviction that she, the descendant of generations of respectable,
honest women, she who had never heard of the sin she had committed,
except in accents of disdain or horror, had become an abandoned
creature, unfit for decent society, branded, defiled, eternally lost.

Anne’s heart went out to her in passionate pity.

“Oh help me! Tell me what to do,” Madge wailed. “You’re the only woman
in the world I dared to tell, because----”

The abrupt pause, and a nervous gesture betrayed her, and Anne started
a little, overcome by a sudden conviction.

“Yes. Why did you tell me, my dear?” she asked quietly.

“Because,” began Madge hurriedly, “you are so kind, so sweet, I
felt----”

“That wasn’t the only reason.”

“No!” she cried with sudden recklessness. “It wasn’t. It’s because I
heard that you--that you--Helen Didier found it out. She never rested.
And then I asked--_him_, and he said I was never to mention your name
to her. But she found out all about it, on the pretence that it was
_you_ who had corrupted my mind, and made me what she calls fast. And
so----”

“And so you thought you might confess to a fellow sinner?”

Anne’s cheek still rested on Madge’s hair, and over her head, her eyes
smiled very quietly into the fire.

Madge was silent.

“I knew you wouldn’t utterly despise me,” she murmured at last, in a
low voice.

“He has gone?” asked Anne after a moment. “You sent him away?”

“He came on Monday--two or three days ago. I’ve forgotten when.” She
made a distracted gesture. “Until--until just lately, it was all right.
We were not--not----”

“Not lovers,” said Anne, finishing the sentence for her in an even
voice.

“Well, he came. And by that time I’d come to my senses, and to all this
awful misery. He’s very kind,” she went on with a sort of surprise,
as a child might speak of the unexpected clemency of some grown-up
person. “He said he didn’t want to make me unhappy, and if I pleased it
should all be at an end, and he would go away. So he went. But Harry’s
coming to-morrow, and I daren’t meet him. I daren’t look at him. It’s
awful--_awful_! I would kill myself,--but I daren’t do that either.”

She rose from her knees, and sank back in her chair, exhausted and
shaking; her eyes fixed on Anne were the eyes of a little hunted animal.

All the terror of the gulf she had put between herself and respectable
women, all the horror of feeling herself _déclassée_ outside the pale
of moral virtue, filled her conventional little soul. It outweighed
the sense of her personal disloyalty; it was greater than her sense of
wanton treachery towards her husband. She was no longer a respectable
woman, and in that fact lay the sting.

Anne leant towards her. “You haven’t told Harry?”

She shook her head.

“Then don’t.”

Madge stared at her incredulously. “But--but look at me!” she
stammered. “He’ll see. He’d guess, even if I don’t tell him. I can’t
stop crying. I can’t--help it.”

While she spoke the tears were running down her cheeks.

“Yes, you can. You can pull yourself together. He expects to find you
ill, but you can meet him with a bright face--for his sake.”

“For his sake?” repeated Madge.

“Yes. Think of him a little, my dear, and forget yourself.”

“You mean he would never forgive me? Never take me back?”

“On the contrary, I know he would. He loves you. You would never hear a
word of reproach from his lips. Your husband is a fine man, Madge, and
a generous one--and a gentleman.”

“Yes, he is! He is!” she returned eagerly. “He _would_ forgive me, and
I ought to tell him. I should never have a happy moment if I didn’t. My
life would be spoilt.”

“And what about his?” asked Anne quietly.

Madge gazed at her. “You mean he--he wouldn’t forget it?”

Anne answered with a curious smile.

“You don’t understand much about men, my little Madge,” she said. “When
they love, their instinct of possession is stronger than anything
you can guess. It’s bound up with a thousand forces from primitive
barbarous times. It may be unreasonable and savage, but it’s there.
A generous man forgives, and even tries to understand. But the wound
remains, and it rankles in spite of him. Have you the right to inflict
such a wound? The wrong is yours. _You_ should be the only one to
suffer.”

“But I _shall_ suffer,” broke in Madge. “And much more, if I feel I’m
deceiving him.”

“Then accept the extra suffering, and bear it alone,” returned Anne
quickly. “One pays for everything, Madge. Is it fair to call upon some
one else to share the expenses?”

There was silence for a moment.

“If _you_ had married--afterwards, I mean,” said Madge hesitatingly,
“wouldn’t you have told your husband?”

“There was no question of my marriage,” answered Anne rather painfully.
“But if your circumstances were mine,” she added after a moment, “I
should act as I advise you to act.”

Madge’s grasp on her hand tightened, but she did not speak.

“Go back and be a good wife to him,” Anne went on. “My dear,” she said
sadly, “you don’t know your blessings. You have married a man with a
faithful steadfast nature. His love will never fail you, and in that,
thousands of women might envy you. All the material for happiness is
within your reach. Happiness for the lack of which many women starve
all their days. It never comes to them. It’s never offered. And if they
can’t bear to be utterly without the joy of love, before the earth
covers them, they have to take it at a great price.”

Her smile brought the tears again to Madge’s eyes.

“Such a price, my dear little Madge, as I’m glad you know nothing
about.”

“Dear Miss Page!” she whispered. A moment’s half-awed revelation came
to her of all that her friend’s words implied. In the light of it, her
own fears and regrets, her whole mental attitude towards the past,
later as well as immediate, seemed incredibly petty, mean, and trivial.
She was ashamed with a nobler less selfish shame than she had ever
experienced.

Her cheeks burnt, and her tears ceased to flow.

“Oh! I’ve been a beast!” she cried involuntarily. “I’ve always been so
selfish and hateful to Harry. I’ve taken everything as my right. I’ve
never thought of any one but myself. I’ve never thought of the lives of
other women. You are right. It would only be one more selfishness to
tell him. I won’t. I’ll love him instead.”

“Do that, my dear, and you’ll make him the happiest of men,” returned
Anne simply. “And don’t refuse him children, Madge,” she added softly.
“You owe him that. Besides, you’re refusing the greatest happiness
for yourself. The blessing that women--women like me, can never have.
That’s part of the price, you see. Not the least part of the price,”
she added as though to herself.

She rose, and Madge stood up too, still holding her hand.

The firelight fell on Anne’s face, and the younger woman looked at
her as though she had never seen her before,--with a tender surprised
admiration.

“You are so beautiful!” she exclaimed suddenly.

The first smile Anne had seen came to her lips.

“I shall pray that my first baby may have eyes just like yours,” she
said, almost gaily. “And hair like your lovely hair--when she’s a
little older.”

Anne laughed. “It used to be brown. It went white very quickly--in
three months.”

As she glanced into the mirror above the fireplace, she thought
suddenly of François’s portrait with its mass of soft fair hair,
_couleur de miel_; _couleur de poussière dorée_. She remembered the
epithets of the painters.

“I must go now,” she said. “To-morrow Harry will be here to take care
of you. Make yourself look pretty, Madge. Put on your nicest frock, and
do your hair the way he likes, high up, you know, with little fluffy
curls about. And make the room pretty, dear. I’ll order some flowers to
be sent round to-night. Lots of them, so you’ll have plenty to do to
arrange them. No more sitting by the fire and crying, mind! No looking
back. Only look forward.”

Madge held her tight. “Oh! you’ve given me so much courage!” she
exclaimed with a long sigh of relief. “You dearest of women. I’ll do
everything you tell me.”




XX


Outside, in the lighted street, Anne called a cab, and gave the address
of the nearest florist.

Her thoughts dwelt upon Madge, as the carriage rattled down the
boulevard.

“I’m scarcely sorry,” was the outcome of her grave reflection. “It
will make a woman of her. She needed a great shock, or a great sorrow
to take her out of herself, and make her realize what it would mean to
lose her husband.”

It was only while she was choosing flowers for her, that the part of
Madge’s confession which concerned herself, came back confusedly to her
mind. It gathered greater clearness as she drove towards her hotel, and
by the time she reached it, and was sitting by her bedroom fire after
dinner, she found herself wondering what would be the outcome of the
matter.

That she might be sure of Madge Dakin, her instinct satisfied her. Yet
the results of Madame Didier’s inquiries would in all probability,
from other sources, reach Dymfield. What then?

Anne’s thoughts flitted from Mrs. Carfax to Mrs. Willcox, the
solicitor’s wife, a lady who was interested in Church Missions, and
Rescue Homes for Fallen Women. The memory of Miss Goldie, a maiden lady
of substantial means, and views of life which even Dymfield considered
rigid, came to her, and forced a smile. She saw her sitting in the
front pew in church, her black bonnet with two purple pansies upon
it, tied tightly under her chin. She saw her angular elbows, under
the short mantle of black silk adorned with bugle trimming. She heard
her rasping voice, which seldom softened even for Anne, who as a rule
affected insensibly the voices of her neighbours.

She remembered Mr. Willcox, stiff, erect, lean-faced Mr. Willcox, loud
in his denunciation of the present age, which he considered lax and
immoral to the last degree.

She thought of the Vicar, with his blustering attempts at modernity,
and his violently expressed scorn of everything but muscular
Christianity and common sense.

Dymfield was the typical English village, with its types indigenous
to the soil, firmly rooted, impervious to criticism, profoundly
self-satisfied.

Dymfield for Anne would be impossible.

But Dymfield meant Fairholme Court, to which her heart was inextricably
linked. The garden that she had planted, the garden that was full of
fragrant memories of the blossoming time of her life. The bare idea of
leaving it sent a pang of desolation to her heart.

She got up and began to walk restlessly about the room.

The absurdity of such an outcome of malicious gossip, struck her with a
pathetic desire to laugh.

“After all these years! At my age,” she murmured.

She thought of her three years of happiness, the little space of time
which had opened like a flower in her grey life, and wondered pitifully
why any one should grudge it to her. But most of all, she shrank from
the thought that people should talk about it. It had been for so many
years her secret possession, the memory that had sweetened all her
later days.

It would be insupportable to know that her acquaintances were gossiping
about her. About her and René.

A painful flush rose to her face as she sat down again by the fire.

After her talk with Madge Dakin, her old life seemed too near. She
thought of the parting with René in the morning--the morning he left
her for his three days’ work at Fontainebleau.

The agony of making that parting a light one! She remembered that he
turned at the door, and came back to kiss her again. The sun was on his
hair, as he crossed the room.

Involuntarily to-night, twenty years after the words were spoken, Anne
put her hands over her ears, that she might not hear his voice. But
she knew what he had said. She remembered how, when he was gone, her
resolution wavered.

Without question he loved her still. Wasn’t it too soon? Might she not
stay a little longer? Just a little while longer? And then the _bonne_
had brought the letters of the second post, and among them there was
one for René in a handwriting she knew. Within the past month they had
been coming very often, these letters. Lately, every day.

She remembered how the sunshine had streamed upon the envelope at which
she sat staring, till at last she moved to make her preparations.

Then the long train journey, and the agony which feared to
betray itself in some insane fashion which might cause her to be
stopped--forcibly prevented from reaching her destination.

She wanted to shriek aloud, to rave and cry, like the madwoman she half
feared she might in fact have become.

Of the next few weeks she recalled nothing but a confused nightmare
impression of unfamiliar rooms, strange faces, strange voices. Of
people who for some mad reason were going about as usual, occupied with
the ordinary business of life; talking, laughing, eating and drinking,
unmoved, unconcerned.

One book on every hotel table drew her like a magnet. She would sit
down anywhere with a _Bradshaw_ before her, and at once, mechanically
plan her journey back to Paris.

Over and over again, she looked out trains, studied connections,
pictured the moment of her arrival.

It would be tea-time. The lamps just lit. René sitting by the
fire--René leaping to his feet to meet her.

Or it would be early morning. She would open his bedroom door softly....

And then the realization of her madness; more sleepless nights, fresh
strange hotels, new cities up and down whose streets she wandered
wondering why she should be there, why she should enter one building
rather than another, why the day never passed, and when the night
came, thinking would God that it were morning.

So terribly near seemed her past torture, that with all her strength
Anne tried to stem the flood of reminiscence.

Thank God, little Madge Dakin had never known, would never know, misery
such as hers! In the midst of her whirl of memories Anne gratefully
considered this.

With an effort at diversion, she tried to recall the names of the
cities in which she stayed, through which she had passed during the
first few months of her exile.

In vain. She had only a confused impression of scorching streets, of
palm trees against a hot blue sky; of seas hatefully, mockingly calm
and blue.

She was in Athens when the news of his death reached her, and with
it a packet of letters written during the first few weeks after her
departure. They were letters from René, never sent, because she had
left no address. Letters written in the frenzied hope that some day
soon he must hear from her.

It was then that she tasted her first moment of peace.

She remembered sitting in a little walled garden somewhere within the
city, and for the first time seeing that the blue sky overhead was
beautiful.

She noticed the broad leaves of a fig-tree clambering upon the wall
opposite, and listened to the dripping of a little stream which flowed
from a stone trough into a well whose mouth was fringed delicately
with ferns and wild flowers. And for the first time came to her a
premonition of the calm and peace, and even happiness of her later
years.

Her emotional life was over. No man as a lover would ever exist for her
again. But she had experienced the love for which she had been willing
to pay. She had paid, and some day she would be content.

René dead, had become hers once more--this time for ever.

Later in the year she met François at Antibes, and heard calmly, with
scarcely a stab of pain, what she was prepared to hear. She had been
right to go. But René had died before he ceased to love her.

Afterwards, her true wander years began. And then at last, the thought
of the house and the garden at Dymfield became dear to her, and she
went to them as a child goes home.

Anne let her mind dwell gratefully upon the quiet happy years she had
spent at Dymfield.

She thought of her work among her flowers, and the paradise of beauty
it had produced. She thought of the poorer village people whose lives
she knew, whose children she loved, to whom for years she had been a
friend. She remembered her little plans for their welfare, all the
pleasant trifles which made up the sum of her daily existence.

And as she mused, came a wondering recognition of the healing of time,
the passing of all violent emotion, whether of joy or of despair.

From some recess of her memory there sprang the words of an Eastern
sage, who as a motto true alike in times of sorrow and times of
delight, told his disciple to grave upon his signet ring, one
sentence--_This too will pass_.




XXI


Anne started for London next morning, intending to spend the night in
town, and devote the next day to her brother, and to Sylvia Carfax, to
whom she had not found time to write.

Early on Thursday morning she drove to Carlisle House.

The page boy who took her up in the lift, indicated a door at the end
of the corridor, and left her.

Anne knocked, and in response to a voice within, entered Sylvia’s
bedroom.

It was littered with cardboard boxes, open trunks, dresses, hats,
raiment of all sorts, and stumbling over the obstacles in her way,
Sylvia rushed towards her with a cry of joy.

Even before she kissed her, Anne had time to notice the worried look on
the girl’s face, which robbed it of its youthful prettiness.

“Oh!” she gasped. “I was afraid you wouldn’t come in time, and I didn’t
know _what_ to do, or how to get out of it. Oh! I’m so thankful to see
you, Miss Page. Sit down. Do sit down--if you can find a place,” she
added, trying to laugh.

Anne chose the bed as the only available spot.

“My dear child, what’s the matter?” she exclaimed. “You’re packing, I
suppose. Where are you going?”

“To--America,” returned Sylvia, with a gulp.

Anne looked at her, and drew her down beside her on the bed.

“Tell me all about it from the very beginning,” she said, with quiet
insistence.

“_Don’t_ be angry with me,” implored Sylvia, her lips trembling. “I
thought I’d been so clever to arrange it all myself, without saying a
word about it. But--but now I’m frightened. And my contract’s signed,
and I daren’t----”

“But what’s it all about? Tell me clearly, Sylvia.”

Sylvia made an effort to obey, and though lucidity was not the strong
part of her story, by the end of half an hour’s questioning and
explanation, Anne gathered that the girl had fallen into the hands of
the manager of a third-rate theatrical company. The man had tempted her
with the offer of a “star” part in a musical comedy, and she had signed
a contract with him for America.

“He said he would make my fortune,” she declared. “He praised my voice
so much, and told me I was wonderful, and that I should make a great
hit. But he made me promise not to tell any one I was going. He said
he wanted to have the credit of discovering me, and all that sort of
thing. I knew mother and father would be horrified, but I thought it
was too good a chance to lose, and that I’d risk their anger. Because,
if I turned out a success, and made a lot of money, they would be very
proud,” she added.

The instinctive knowledge of human nature shared by the pillars of the
Church, caused Anne despite her anxiety, a secret smile.

“I thought he was so kind,” Sylvia went on pitifully, “and he seemed
so nice at first, but lately he’s been different, and his manner has
been so funny. He--he looked at me in a horrid way yesterday,” she
confessed, “and held my hand tight, and when I tried to get away, he
laughed. But my contract’s signed,” she declared with a wail of despair
in her voice.

“Haven’t the principals of this place interfered?” Anne inquired. “The
matron, or whoever it is who’s supposed to look after you?”

“They think I’m going home,” confessed Sylvia in an abashed voice. “I
managed it so that they should think so.”

Anne rose, and with a terrified expression, the girl clung to her hand.

“Oh! Miss Page,” she gasped. “You’re not going? I’m to sail to-morrow
night, and----”

“Don’t be frightened, you silly little thing. Of course you won’t sail
to-morrow, nor any other night. Give me the address of this man.”

Sylvia falteringly repeated it.

Anne wrote it down, and stooped to kiss her.

“Unpack all those things, and put them tidy,” she said. “I haven’t
time to scold you now, but I’ll come back and do it thoroughly this
afternoon.”

The girl’s look of relief touched her, but she could scarcely repress
a smile as she turned at the door, to see her standing like a penitent
baby amongst all her finery.

“I wonder what I should have done with daughters?” she asked herself,
half humorously, as she stepped into a cab, outside.

The question was answered by a smile and a sigh that were almost
simultaneous.

Anne spent a busy morning. She went first to her solicitor, and after
an hour’s colloquy with him on the case of Sylvia Carfax, she drove on
to her brother’s house in Kensington. It stood in a highly respectable
square, and was one of the hundreds of dull substantial edifices which
came into existence during the mid-Victorian era.

Anne rang the bell, and stood waiting rather excitedly under the stucco
canopy supported by pillars.

Her present meeting with Hugh was divided from the last, by a period
of twenty years. It was odd to remember how little she knew of this
brother, her only near relative in the world. He would be much changed,
of course.

A sudden vivid recollection of the last time she had met him, swept
through her mind, as she stood waiting admittance. How desolate she
had been. How shy. How filled with the sense of being an outsider, a
forgotten guest, unbidden to the banquet of life!

The door opened, and it was Hugh himself who drew her over the
threshold, and welcomed her in the loud, kind voice she remembered.

“We’ve been waiting for you all the morning,” he declared, “and I
rushed down when I heard the bell. Come in and let me look at you! It’s
impossible to see anything in this wretched foggy atmosphere.”

With his arm still round her shoulder, he pushed open the door of a
large room on the right of the hall.

“Here she is, Alice!” he exclaimed, as his wife rose from a sofa near
the fire.

“Why Anne, what have you done to yourself?”

The words were uttered in amazement. Anne had slipped off her heavy
cloak, and stood laughing tremulously as she held her brother by both
hands, and noticed for the first time that his hair was white, and his
good-natured bronzed face lined and wrinkled. She turned from him to
greet her sister-in-law.

The slim little creature she remembered was a stout matron, whose hair
was just touched with grey.

Alice’s start of amazement as she gazed a moment before she kissed her,
was almost comic.

“Why, Anne, my dear, you’ve grown quite a beautiful woman!” declared
her brother, so simply that the tears sprang to Anne’s eyes.

“She’s grown younger, hasn’t she, Alice?” He looked at her with a
puzzled expression.

Anne laughed, and touched her hair. “But it’s your white hair that----
And yet I don’t know. It’s you altogether! I never saw such a change.
You---- She looks like a great lady in a French picture, doesn’t she,
Alice? Court of one of the French kings. Louis the Sixteenth, that
sort of thing.”

Anne laughed again. “My dear boy. You make me embarrassed. Don’t stare
at me so,” she begged.

The pink colour sprang into her cheeks, and the shy deprecating smile
of François’ portrait crept for a moment to her lips.

“I’m just Anne--twenty years older than when you last saw me.”

“Well--it’s magic. I give it up,” declared Hugh.

“Where are the boys?” she asked, turning with a quick, eager movement
to her sister-in-law. “I want to see my nephews.”

“They’re out to-day. I’m so sorry. They’ve gone to lunch with some
relations of mine. But you’ll see them this evening. I let them go
because I knew that you would want to talk to Hugh,” Alice answered.
“You’ll excuse me a little while, won’t you? I must speak to cook.”

Her voice--her tone of deference, marked Alice’s recognition of the
change in the woman she had once regarded as insignificant, a poor meek
creature to be treated with compassion and tolerance; and her husband’s
awkward laugh as she closed the door, was sufficient indication that
her altered attitude was not lost upon him.

“She can’t help fussing about the servants. Old habits, you know,” he
said, turning to his sister. “For years she did all the housework, and
she can’t give it up.”

“But you’ve finished with work now, haven’t you, dear?” Anne asked, as
she sat down beside her brother on the sofa.

“Thanks to you.” Hugh glanced at her gratefully.

“That money was just what I wanted, Anne. It made me. I only needed
capital to develop the farm, and it came just at the right moment. We
owe everything to your generosity, dear. And now we’re going to talk
business. You’ve put me off in every letter, but I must insist----”

Anne laid her hand quickly on his lips. “I won’t hear a word about
it!” she declared. “You’re not going to rob me of one of the greatest
delights of my life, Hugh? The power I once had to help my only
brother? You can’t be so unkind!”

Her tone of pained entreaty made him laugh. He kissed her again.

“You dear absurd woman! Why haven’t you married, Anne?” he exclaimed
suddenly. “Some man’s been robbed of a wonderful wife. It’s not fair of
you!”

She smiled. “Tell me about the boys,” she urged.

A maid entered to announce that lunch was served, and during the meal,
the boys and their prospects were the chief topic of conversation.

“Alice thinks them both geniuses, of course,” laughed her husband. “But
they’re only ordinary youths. I shall be quite satisfied if they can
just jog along.”

“Rupert has great talent,” his mother assured Anne. “Don’t listen to
Hugh. I’m sure he’ll make a splendid architect.”

“I’m sure he will,” she agreed sympathetically.

“You know we lost our little girl?” said Alice softly, when they
returned to the drawing-room.

Her voice suddenly drew Anne’s heart.

“The boys are dears, of course,” she added. “But I should love to have
had a daughter.”

Anne was silent a moment. Then with a sudden inspiration, she thought
of Sylvia.

“Where’s your luggage?” inquired Hugh. “Bless my soul, I’d forgotten
it! You’re going to stay with us, Anne, of course?”

“Your room is all ready,” Alice assured her rather timidly.

“I _was_ going back to-day, and coming to you later. But if I may send
for my things from the hotel, I should like to stay a little while.
There’s a child I know, a girl I must help out of a difficulty, and I
find it will take a little time.”

She told them Sylvia’s story, and noticed with satisfaction that Alice
seemed interested.

“Poor silly child!” she exclaimed. “She ought to be taken care of. She
ought to live in some nice family.”

Anne made a mental note, but at the moment said nothing.




XXII


Two or three days later, she was back at Fairholme Court.

Burks had been sent on to join the other servants, and by the time Anne
reached the house, everything was in its usual spotless order.

As she sat looking into the fire the afternoon following her return,
Anne felt that it was good to be home. She glanced round the charming
room, and experienced a thrill of pleasure. The fresh curtains at the
windows with their rose garlands, pleased her eye. The inlaid cabinets,
the tables, the dainty bookcases, shining and spotless from the maids’
energetic ministrations, reflected the firelight at every angle. The
pictures she loved seemed even more beautiful for her absence, and the
pots of lilies and hyacinths about the room filled the air with sweet
scent.

Anne looked from them to her books, as one glances from one loved
face to another. It was good to be home, and she felt happy, and at
rest. Painful misgivings had disappeared, and her mind was filled with
contented thoughts of her friends.

From Sylvia, inexpressibly relieved, she had just received a letter of
girlish effusion and gratitude.

It was in her hand as she sat smiling into the fire, glad to remember
the girl as she had yesterday seen her, pretty once more, gay, and full
of extravagantly noble resolutions for the future.

Madge Dakin, who with her husband had returned a few days previously,
she had already seen.

She looked thin and pale still, but Anne was satisfied to hear that
Harry was the dearest and best of men, and that she had never been so
much in love with any one in her life.

To-day Anne found the human comedy agreeable. A spectacle to be viewed
with a smile from which tears of pity and sympathy were not very far
removed. But the smile came first. She reflected that she must see the
Vicar, and she was making up her mind to leave the fireside for that
purpose, when the door opened, and he was announced.

She rose quickly with an exclamation of pleasure, and went to meet him.

He took her outstretched hand, but let it drop again immediately, and
glancing at him with half-defined surprise, she saw that he wore his
pulpit expression of slightly pompous gravity.

“Sit down,” begged Anne, cordially. “I was just coming up to see you.”

“Thank you,” said the Vicar, dropping heavily into the chair she
indicated.

“I saw Sylvia only yesterday. She sent many messages to you, and to her
mother.”

“Thank you,” repeated the Vicar. “It is distressing to me, but I am
constrained to say I’m sorry you saw her,” he added after a moment’s
hesitation.

Anne looked at him in silence, and Mr. Carfax cleared his throat.

“Miss Page,” he began, “I am here to speak on a very painful subject,
and I think the sooner I mention it the better.”

“Certainly,” said Anne, drawing herself back against the cushions of
her chair.

“I repeat, I am sorry you have seen my child, because in future, I say
it with great reluctance, I wish her acquaintance with you to cease.”

Anne still waited in silence, and again the Vicar cleared his throat.
It was difficult to talk with her eyes upon him, and his carefully
prepared speeches seemed a trifle ridiculous.

“I’d better tell you the history of this affair from the beginning,” he
broke out abruptly. “Shortly it is this. Some two or three weeks ago I
received a private letter from a lady whose name I will not mention----”

“Madame Didier,” interrupted Anne quietly.

The Vicar paused.

“Madame Didier, since you seem to know my correspondent. It was a
letter written to me as the vicar of the parish, begging me to warn Dr.
Dakin against your influence with his wife.”

Anne did not speak.

“Madame Didier gave reasons for this interference,” he went on after a
moment. “Reasons which seemed to me to be based on false and scandalous
charges. The letter, however, so intimately concerned my friend, that I
was compelled to show it to him. It was burnt in my presence, and such
was my implicit confidence in you that I wrote a strong, I may say a
threatening letter to the lady, forbidding her to circulate libellous
reports.”

“I am grateful to you,” Anne said.

The Vicar glanced at her.

“I have since regretted that letter,” he added deliberately.

“A fortnight ago, business called me to London, and I spent an evening
with my wife’s friends, the Lovells. Madame Didier, whose stay in
England has been protracted, was with her aunt. I did not know this
when I went to see the Lovells,” he added, “or I should naturally have
avoided the chance of an unpleasant encounter.

“However, in spite of my protestations, and my refusal to hear your
name spoken by her, the lady insisted, and to avoid entering upon
unpleasant details, I may say at once that she gave me incontrovertible
evidence as to the truth of her assertions.”

There was a pause which Anne did not break. She sat quite still,
looking into the fire.

“I need not say,” pursued the Vicar stiffly, “that though I was
constrained to offer an apology to Madame Didier for my somewhat
intemperate letter, I repeated my warning to her with regard to the
danger of spreading this story.”

“Thank you,” said Anne again.

The Vicar moved uncomfortably.

“Under any other circumstances--had Madame Didier, I mean, merely
reported gossip or hearsay, I should immediately have come to you for
an explanation, and I should have accepted your bare word against what
might to others appear grave suspicion. But unfortunately, as I said,
her evidence is incontrovertible. I have seen letters. In short, to
put it plainly, Miss Page, to ask for an explanation from you would be
the merest farce. It therefore becomes my painful duty----”

“An explanation of what?” asked Anne, turning to him with a deliberate
movement, and again the Vicar fidgeted under her gaze.

“Of--of--a mode of life which proves you to have been unworthy of the
position you have held in our midst.”

The Vicar gathered himself together; it was time for the peroration,
and from force of habit his voice grew full and deep. He reminded
himself vigorously of the sanctity of the home, the preservation of the
family, and in sonorous tones continued----

“You have been loved and trusted by pure and innocent women. You have
been esteemed as a friend by myself, as well as by many another upright
and honourable man. And I say it with pain, you have deceived us. My
own child has made you her confidante----”

Anne rose, and the stream of the Vicar’s eloquence suddenly ran dry.

There was a moment’s silence, during which he felt a prey to greater
and more paralyzing nervousness than he had experienced since the
preaching of his first sermon.

The pause was broken by the opening of the door, and the appearance of
Burks with a letter on a tray.

“This is sent down from the Vicarage, ma’am,” she said, addressing her
mistress, “and the maid says will Mr. Carfax kindly read it at once.”

She handed the tray to the Vicar, who took the letter, and with a
murmured apology, broke the envelope. A note from his wife dropped out
first. He picked it up, and hurriedly glanced through its contents.

    “_I am wild with anxiety. I send you the enclosed, which has
    just come from Mrs. Lovell, so that you may read it while you
    are with Miss Page. She may perhaps be able to throw some light
    upon the matter. At any rate, ask her advice. She is so good
    and wise._”

The Vicar snatched up the other letter, which mechanically, in a dazed
voice, he began to read aloud.

    “_MY DEAR MARY_,

    “_I hasten to tell you, though I fear too late, of something
    I have just heard about your dear Sylvia. She has signed a
    contract to go to America with a theatrical travelling company,
    and I am told that she has already sailed. The manager I
    understand to be a man of bad character, as indeed he must be
    to induce a girl to leave England without her parents’ consent.
    This has come to my knowledge in a roundabout way through a
    chorus girl who happens to be related to my maid. I should have
    telegraphed, but Simpkins has just showed me the announcement
    of the company’s departure from Liverpool, and in that case a
    telegram is useless._

    “_All my sympathy, dear. In haste_,
        “_Your affectionate_
            “_LAURA LOVELL_.”

Mr. Carfax dropped the letter.

In the waning light, Anne saw that his face was white.

“You must have known of this!” he broke out fiercely. “You must have
known, I say!”

Anne moved swiftly to his side, and laid her hand on his arm.

“It’s all right,” she whispered hurriedly. “I _did_ know. I stopped it.
Sylvia is quite safe, at Carlisle House. If I had guessed that such
news would reach you, I would have told you at once. I was going to
tell you when you came in. But you put it out of my head,” she added
simply.

The Vicar’s colour had not returned. He stood mopping his forehead
slowly with his handkerchief, his face working so painfully that Anne,
her eyes full of tears, turned away.

She opened her writing-table, and rang the bell.

“What are you going to do?” stammered her companion.

“Send a note to your wife. I can’t bear to think of her anxiety.”

“True,” murmured the Vicar. “You are very kind. It’s like you--to think
of everything,” he added, still in a dazed voice.

He began to pace the room with uneven steps.

“If the maid has gone, run up as quickly as you can to the Vicarage
with this note,” said Anne, sealing the envelope, as Burks entered.

“She’s still here, ma’am.”

“Then give it to her, and tell her to go _at once_, please, Burks. It’s
important. Don’t keep her a moment longer talking.”

The maid disappeared, and Anne lighted the candles on the mantelpiece,
quietly, one by one.

“You need have no anxiety,” she said without looking at the Vicar.
“Sylvia has been very imprudent, but she realizes it, and is sorry.
She had arranged with me to come home and tell you all about it, as
soon as I had first spoken to you. She seemed to think that I might
have some--some little influence. But I must now leave her to tell
her own story. I only want you to understand that she’s safe. I went
to my solicitor about the matter, and as she is under age, he had no
difficulty in settling the whole affair.”

“But--this man?” demanded Mr. Carfax in an unsteady voice. “The man
Mrs. Lovell mentions?”

For the first time she glanced at him, and saw the fear in his eyes.

“Be quite easy. Sylvia had no idea of any evil intention on the man’s
part. She is only utterly ignorant and inexperienced. She is one of the
pure and innocent women you mentioned just now.”

Her voice was gentle, and had not a trace of bitterness.

The Vicar continued for a moment his perambulation of the room.

Then he stopped abruptly and raised his head.

“Thank you,” he said in a husky tone. “I owe you a debt I can never
repay. I----” he hesitated painfully. “I wish to God----” he broke out
again, and again paused. She looked at him steadily.

All the pompous self-importance had died out of his face; all the
arrogance of the priest who denounces the sinner. His was the very
human face of a man still gasping with relief from deadly fear, still
unable to believe that the threatened danger is over. And with this
expression of scarcely assured safety there was mingled real sorrow, a
look of real affection for the woman to whom he owed his escape from a
crushing blow.

“You spoke of an explanation,” said Anne in a low voice. “A moment ago
I should have asked you to leave me, because of the manner in which you
spoke of it.

“Now I have changed my mind, and I think I should like to give you an
explanation--_my_ explanation.”

She was still standing, still looking at him steadily.

“You were kind enough to say that people here had loved and trusted me.
I am glad if that is the case--very glad.” She waited a moment.

“If as you say they have been good enough to give me their love and
confidence, it is because I have understood them; because they have
never been afraid to tell me their inmost thoughts. Well, you will not
believe me, perhaps,--that power of understanding would never have been
mine but for the ‘mode of life’ to which you have alluded.

“Twenty years ago, Mr. Carfax, I was a self-doubting, colourless woman.
My youth, as I thought, was past. It had brought me nothing. No love,
no human experience, no joys, no very deep sorrows even. Nothing but
the grey hopeless depression of a woman who has never taken her part
in the world, who has always stood outside, who knows nothing of life;
the sort of woman who ignorant to begin with, grows narrower and more
prejudiced as the years pass, till at last in the bitter sense of the
word, she is an old maid by nature, useless as a friend, helpless as
a comforter, of no account in a world of men and women she cannot
understand.

“Well, before that happened to me, before I was old in heart at least,
I met a man who loved me, and whom I loved. I might have married him.
I chose _not_ to marry him, because----” She smiled a little. “I need
not trouble you with my reasons. They seemed good reasons to me, and I
have never regretted them. I lived with him for three years. The memory
of those three years has lasted with me to this day, and has made me a
woman so proud and happy that if my deep content has overflowed, and
reached the lives of others, it is no credit to me. I simply can’t
help caring for people, because by the mercy of Heaven, I have loved
and been loved. Nothing else, for me at least, would have made that
understanding and caring possible. Not the money that came to me, nor
the opportunities it afforded for what is called ‘doing good.’ It was
a change in _me_, that was needed, a personal experience of loving
and suffering. Well! I have loved and I have suffered, and now I
_understand_.

“That’s my little story. It’s a story I would not have told you ten
minutes ago. But--well, you made me feel just now that you were human.

“Don’t imagine you see before you the sinner that repenteth. She has
never repented. She never will repent, though it’s an old white-haired
woman who is talking--to a man years younger than herself!”

Her eyes met his, and beneath their smiling gaze, half wise, half
whimsical, the Vicar dropped his own, and reddened like a school-boy.

The gentle reproof, implied rather than spoken, went home.

Suddenly, in the presence of this dignified gracious woman, he felt raw
and awkward, very young, more than a little ashamed. He was confused
moreover, with the sense that there existed possibly whole realms of
experience which no code of morals he had ever preached seemed adequate
to cover.

Here was a woman who certainly possessed the fairest of the Christian
virtues. She was gentle, tolerant, generous (with a twinge of
compunction he realized how great a part the anticipated loss of her
donations had played in his reflections during the walk from the
Vicarage to Fairholme Court). She was patient, longsuffering,--the
Vicar ran through the whole gamut of spiritual gifts, and acknowledged
her richly endowed.

Could it be that there were other paths to the Kingdom of Heaven than
the strait way and the narrow gate that alone were said to lead to
salvation?

The very useful brain of Mr. Carfax, unaccustomed to be exercised in
unusual directions, began to feel the strain, and its possessor wisely
took the hint, and abandoned the fatiguing labour of original research.

In any case Miss Page was a charming woman, and by however amazing
process the result had been achieved, a good one also.

He looked at her, and with a sudden frank movement, held out his hand.

“Forgive me,” he said simply. “You--you have shown me I had no right to
judge. I beg your pardon.”

Anne put her hand into his with a very sweet smile.

“My dear friend,” she replied, “you must do what you think right, and
Dymfield will not be behind the judgment of most of the world in this
matter. You know I love the place, but I can’t stay here when the
people no longer look upon me as a friend. Well, the world is wide, and
fortunately for me I’m not a poor woman.”

“You mustn’t leave us! You won’t leave us!” begged the Vicar.
“There will be no occasion. The position is unchanged. The only two
people who know anything of--of the matter, are your friends. Even
if through malice or carelessness a breath of scandal should reach
others, surely you can trust us to treat the rumour with the----” He
hesitated.

“With the contempt it doesn’t deserve?” suggested Anne gently.

Greatly to his surprise, and somewhat to his horror, the Reverend
George Carfax was betrayed into an answering smile.

He hastened to efface it, but the deed was done.

“And Sylvia?” asked Anne tentatively. “I wanted her to stay with me for
a few days. You have only to say if you would rather she did not, and I
won’t ask her.”

“If after all the trouble she has given you, Sylvia will be welcome, I
can answer for her delight,” returned Mr. Carfax promptly.

Anne put out her hand with an impulsive gesture.

“You are quite a dear!” she observed, and her sudden smile still
further illuminated the dusky corners of the Vicar’s strictly limited
imagination.

The entrance of Burks with the tea-things gave him a moment to recover
from the shock of a series of mental and emotional upheavals to which
he was unaccustomed.

“You will stay, of course?” begged Anne. “My note to your wife was
quite explicit,” she added. “She won’t be anxious now.”

“Thank you,” said Mr. Carfax. “I want to hear particulars about Sylvia,
and I feel I should be all the better for a cup of tea.”

Five minutes later, Mrs. Carfax entered a room bright with fire and
candle-light, in which her husband sat comfortably ensconced in an
arm-chair opposite to Miss Page, who was passing him hot cakes of a
delicious crispness.

Anne went quickly across the room.

“It’s quite right. Don’t worry,” she hastened to say, as she kissed her
visitor. “I’m just telling your husband all about it.”

“Sylvia must come home!” declared her mother, after Anne’s recital.
Her hand was still trembling as she put down her tea-cup. “She’s not
fit to be left alone in a great wicked city. I always _said_ to George
it was madness to let her go away from us!”

“It’s so difficult to get women to take broad views,” complained the
Vicar, turning to Anne, “it requires the masculine mind, free from
prejudice and indifferent to common opinion, to see the wider outlook.”

Anne laid her hand on his wife’s arm.

“Dear Mrs. Carfax, do let her finish her training,” she urged. “The
child acknowledges her foolishness. I quite agree that she ought not
to be alone, and before you came in, I was suggesting a plan to your
husband.

“Let her go to my brother and his wife. They lost their little girl
some years ago, and Alice has always longed for a daughter. She’s such
a nice kind little woman, and she would treat Sylvia as her own child.
I spoke to her of the possibility of this, before I left London, and
she was delighted with the idea.”

“It would be a splendid thing for her, Mary, if it can be arranged.
It’s so like Miss Page to have thought of such a plan.”

Mrs. Carfax hesitated.

“We must think about it. I wouldn’t give my consent for her to go
anywhere else. But if it’s a case of _your_ relations, dear, it’s
different. I should feel safe and happy about her, of course. We must
talk about it, George.”

Anne leant back against her sofa cushions with a satisfied expression.

When her visitors rose to go, she followed them to the door.

While his wife was being helped into her goloshes by Burks, outside in
the hall, the Vicar lingered a moment to hold her hand in a tight grasp.

“I can never thank you enough,” he murmured. “You are the best woman I
ever met,” he added, looking her straight in the face.

Anne flushed a little; there were tears in her eyes.

“Good-bye,” she said. “I shall look forward to having Sylvia here next
week.”

       *       *       *       *       *

When the hall door had closed, she drew a deep breath of exhaustion and
relief.

She had won peace with honour. She knew it, and was thankful. But she
was glad to be alone.

She walked round the room, bending over the pots of lilies of the
valley, touching the waxen bells of the hyacinths with gentle fingers.
They had been grown for her home-coming, and they welcomed her
delicately. She stirred the fire to a brighter blaze, and smiled to see
its glow spreading to the furthest corner of the room.

Never had her home seemed so sweet, so inviting, so restful.

“It would have broken my heart to leave it!” she thought with sudden
conviction.

She looked at the bookcases filled with books all the more precious,
because for three months she had not touched them.

Finally she reached for a volume on one of the upper shelves, and
taking it to the sofa, turned to a poem she loved.

    “_Mère des souvenirs, maîtresse des maîtresses,
     O toi, tous mes plaisirs! O toi, tous mes devoirs!
     Tu te rappelleras la beauté des caresses,
     La douceur du foyer et le charme des soirs,
     Mère des souvenirs, maîtresse des maîtresses!_

    “_Les soirs illuminés par l’ardeur du charbon,
     Et les soirs au balcon, voilés de vapeurs roses.
     Que ton sein m’était doux! que ton cœur m’était bon!
     Nous avons dit souvent d’impérissables choses,
     Les soirs illuminés par l’ardeur du charbon._”

Anne let the book slip into her lap. “_Nous avons dit souvent
d’impérissables choses_,” she repeated softly.

It was of these “imperishable things” she was thinking, the things of
the spirit, that persist when as with her the desire of the flesh
is dead, and the lust of the eyes. The imperishable things that last
into the evening of life, when the stars come out, and ever nearer and
nearer draw the “murmurs and scents of the infinite sea.”




XXIII


It was two years before François Fontenelle re-visited Fairholme Court.
Again it was June, and Anne had taken him to the garden, full of pride
to show him her roses in the height of their beauty.

They strolled round its paths talking of a thousand things, and finally
sat down under the arch, over which there poured a cascade of snowy
bloom. The table in front of the bench was littered with papers, which
François began idly to examine.

“_The New Thought!_” he exclaimed, holding up one of the leaflets
between his finger and thumb. “What on earth are _you_ doing with this
latter day product?”

Anne laughed. “A strenuous young thing who is spending her holiday in
the village brought a heap of papers this morning, and begged me to
read them. She said it was scandalous that such an intelligent woman
as I appeared to her, should be ignorant of the ‘movement,’” she added
demurely.

“Whatever the modern young woman lacks, it isn’t cheek,” he returned.

“Well! What do you think of the ‘no property’ idea in the eternally
boring sex question? Let me see, there are to be state babies, aren’t
there? Have state lovers been suggested yet, or is that a figment of my
imagination?”

Anne sighed. “Perhaps I’m too old for it,” she said. “I know I don’t
understand it. It all seems to me so terribly business-like, and I was
never a business woman.”

François laughed. “I should as soon expect one of these roses to start
company promoting.”

“One thing I feel quite sure about,” she went on, drawing her lace
shawl round her shoulders. “The men and women who write some of these
letters have never loved.”

“Love has gone out of fashion in England, and the new wisdom has taken
its place,” observed François. “Its professors are gentlemen who live
on grape nuts, and are occupied municipally. They don’t believe in
love, partly because a diet of grape nuts is not conducive to the
emotion, partly because they are afraid of disagreeing with Mr. Bernard
Shaw. You have saved me from belonging to the latter class, but only as
a brand is snatched from the burning.”

“The simile is ill-chosen,” declared Anne serenely. “There’s no
fire about any of the new doctrines. They are all eminently cool,
calculating and dull. Dull as ditch-water, and quite as appetizing.”

François smiled. “You are a very old-fashioned woman, Anne,” he
declared, “and the sight of these things near you is absurd, and even
indecent.”

He swept them from the table.

“Go and fetch your Herrick, and read me how roses first came red, and
lilies white.”

“My lord shall be obeyed--another time,” said Anne laughing.

“How is Mrs. Dakin?” asked François suddenly, lighting a cigarette.

Anne was engaged in pushing the end of a trailing green branch through
one of the spaces in the lattice work.

“She and the baby, who is six weeks old to-day, are away on a visit to
her mother. She is very well, and exceedingly happy,” she added after a
moment spent in arranging the branch to her satisfaction.

“I’m glad to hear it.”

She turned to him. “I believe you are, François.”

“I’m also glad to hear she’s away, since because of that circumstance
presumably I was honoured with an invitation to-day.”

“Why haven’t I seen you for so long?” inquired Anne irrelevantly.

“I was afraid to come,” he said, looking at her with a smile.

“Why?”

“Oh, not because I dreaded a scene with you. Have you ever made a scene
in your life, Anne? You ought to have done it once at least, to prove
your affinity with the sex you adorn. But I don’t believe you ever
have. No. I was afraid of your eyes.”

“What’s the matter with my eyes?” she asked, with a smile concealed in
them.

“Anne Page, if you’re going to flirt with me I give you due warning
that I’m a poor weak man, and I can’t answer for the consequences.”

She laughed. “The baby is a darling, and I’m its godmother. They’ve
called her _Anne_.”

“They may, but they needn’t flatter themselves she’ll ever be as
attractive as Anne Page.”

“Her father already thinks her the most lovely creature in the
world--except his wife.”

“And how are all the other worthies? Still at your feet, I suppose?”

“They are all charming to me. My little friend Sylvia, the Vicar’s
daughter, sang at her first concert the other night, and had a
great success. The vicarage is standing on its head with pride, in
consequence.”

“And the pastoral life still amuses you?”

“Very much.”

“Wonderful woman!”

“Dear François, why not?” she asked. “You know I am a very simple
person.”

“Yes. Though you were once the queen of quite a brilliant salon.”

She was silent.

“When are you coming over to see your picture?”

“This autumn.” For a moment she paused. “You know my wishes, François?
I have left René’s pictures to the Luxembourg. The two we like
best--you know them--are to hang on either side of the portrait. It’s
in my will, of course.”

He smoked a moment without speaking.

“I wonder if he’ll come and look at them?” he said at last. “I think he
will, and you’ll smile at him out of the portrait.”

“I’m so glad he liked it,” she answered softly, after a long pause.

“He only saw it once. I never dared show it to him again. That’s why I
put it away.”

The birds had begun their evening song, and the garden rang with the
voices of blackbirds and thrushes.

“Well! I must get back to _The Chase_,” declared François, glancing at
his watch. “I shall be late for dinner as it is. This is good-bye till
September. Not a moment later mind, and then you will stay in Paris a
decent time?”

He looked at her, as she got up and stood for a moment embowered in the
roses, her lace shawl hanging from her arms, her figure still beautiful
and gracious.

“The gods have granted you the gift of eternal youth, Anne,” he
declared. “I want to paint another portrait.”

She laughed, and shook her head.

“There will be no more portraits,” she said.

       *       *       *       *       *

She went with him as far as a little gate which gave upon the meadows,
through which a field path led to _The Chase_.

After he had gone she wandered into the lavender-garden, and in the
gathering summer twilight paced the path between the grey-green borders.

In the west, the sky was still flushed with sunset. The air, so quiet
that not a leaf trembled, was sweet with the scent of flowers.

Anne walked slowly, her mind occupied with pleasant trifles. She
decided that the lilies in the south border must this autumn be
divided. She must tell Davis to plant more daffodils in the orchard
under the apple trees. There was the village children’s treat to be
considered, and she must not forget to talk it over with the Vicar.
Suddenly she remembered that Dr. Dakin was coming in to smoke his pipe
and talk. Madge and the baby were returning on Thursday. He would
therefore be in excellent spirits.

The roses on the hedge round the sundial breathed a sweet strong
fragrance into the dusk.

Anne picked one of them, and tucked it into the front of her gown,
before she turned towards the house.


THE END


PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLES.




       *       *       *       *       *




ADVERTISEMENTS




 THE COMPLETE WORKS
 OF
 WILLIAM J. LOCKE

“LIFE IS A GLORIOUS THING.”--_W. J. Locke_

“If you wish to be lifted out of the petty cares of to-day, read one
of Locke’s novels. You may select any from the following titles and be
certain of meeting some new and delightful friends. His characters are
worth knowing.”--_Baltimore Sun._

    The Morals of Marcus Ordeyne
    At the Gate of Samaria
    A Study in Shadows
    Where Love Is
    Derelicts
    The Demagogue and Lady Phayre
    The Belovéd Vagabond
    The White Dove
    The Usurper
    Septimus
    Idols

 _12mo._      _Cloth._      _$1.50 each._

Eleven volumes bound in green cloth. Uniform edition in box. $15.00 per
set. Half morocco $45.00 net. Express prepaid.


The Belovéd Vagabond

“‘The Belovéd Vagabond’ is a gently-written, fascinating tale. Make his
acquaintance some dreary, rain-soaked evening and find the vagabond
nerve-thrilling in your own heart.”--_Chicago Record-Herald._


Septimus

“Septimus is the joy of the year.”--_American Magazine._


The Morals of Marcus Ordeyne

“A literary event of the first importance.”--_Boston Herald._

“One of those rare and much-to-be-desired stories which keep one
divided between an interested impatience to get on, and an irresistible
temptation to linger for full enjoyment by the way.”--_Life._


Where Love Is

“A capital story told with skill.”--_New York Evening Sun._

“One of those unusual novels of which the end is as good as the
beginning.”--_New York Globe._


The Usurper

“Contains the hall-mark of genius itself. The plot is masterly in
conception, the descriptions are all vivid flashes from a brilliant
pen. It is impossible to read and not marvel at the skilled workmanship
and the constant dramatic intensity of the incident, situations and
climax.”--_The Boston Herald._


Derelicts

“Mr. Locke tells his story in a very true, a very moving, and a very
noble book. If any one can read the last chapter with dry eyes we
shall be surprised. ‘Derelicts’ is an impressive, an important book.
Yvonne is a creation that any artist might be proud of.”--_The Daily
Chronicle._


Idols

“One of the very few distinguished novels of this present book
season.”--_The Daily Mail._

“A brilliantly written and eminently readable book.”--_The London Daily
Telegraph._


A Study in Shadows

“Mr. Locke has achieved a distinct success in this novel. He has struck
many emotional chords, and struck them all with a firm, sure hand. In
the relations between Katherine and Raine he had a delicate problem to
handle, and he has handled it delicately.”--_The Daily Chronicle._


The White Dove

“It is an interesting story. The characters are strongly conceived
and vividly presented, and the dramatic moments are powerfully
realized.”--_The Morning Post._


The Demagogue and Lady Phayre

“Think of Locke’s clever books. Then think of a book as different from
any of these as one can well imagine--that will be Mr. Locke’s new
book.”--_New York World._


At the Gate of Samaria

“William J. Locke’s novels are nothing if not unusual. They are marked
by a quaint originality. The habitual novel reader inevitably is
grateful for a refreshing sense of escaping the commonplace path of
conclusion.”--_Chicago Record-Herald._




ANATOLE FRANCE


“Anatole France is a writer whose personality is very strongly
reflected in his works.... To reproduce his evanescent grace and charm
is not to be lightly achieved, but the translators have done their
work with care, distinction, and a very happy sense of the value of
words.”--_Daily Graphic._

“We must now all read all of Anatole France. The offer is too good to
be shirked. He is just Anatole France, the greatest living writer of
French.”--_Daily Chronicle._

_Complete Limited Edition in English_

Under the general editorship of Frederic Chapman. 8vo., special
light-weight paper, wide margins, Caslon type, bound in red and gold,
gilt top, and papers from designs by Beardsley, initials by Ospovat.
_$2.00 per volume_ (except Joan of Arc), _postpaid_.


The Red Lily.

Translated by WINIFRED STEPHENS.


The Well of Saint Clare.

Translated by ALFRED ALLINSON.


Mother of Pearl.

Translated by FREDERIC CHAPMAN, Containing:

    The Procurator of Judea
    Our Lady’s Juggler
    Amycus and Celestine
    Madam de Luzy, etc.


The Garden of Epicurus.

Translated by ALFRED R. ALLINSON, Containing:

    In the Elysian Fields
    Card Houses
    Careers for Women
    The Priory, etc.


The Crime of Sylvestre Bonnard.

Translated by LAFCADIO HEARN.

This novel was “crowned” by the French Academy in 1881, the author
being received into membership in 1896.

“The highest presentation of France’s many qualities and gifts is to be
found in this exquisite book.”


Joan of Arc.

Translated by WINIFRED STEPHENS. 2 volumes. _$8.00 net per set._
_Postage extra._

“This is an epoch-making book.... Beneath the simplicity of the
mediæval narrative there may still be discerned the delicious irony
and the delicate subtle humor of the novels.”--WINIFRED STEPHENS in
“_French Novelists of Today_.”




DOLF WYLLARDE

 _12mo_  _$1.50 each_

“Dolf Wyllarde sees life with clear eyes and puts down what she sees
with a fearless pen.... More than a little of the flavor of Kipling, in
the good old days of Plain Tales from the Hills.”--_New York Globe._


Mafoota

A Romance of Jamaica

“The plot has a resemblance to that of Wilkie Collins’ ‘The New
Magdalen,’ but the heroine is a puritan of the strictest type; the
subject matter is like ‘The Helpmate.’”--_Springfield Republican._


As Ye Have Sown

“A brilliant story dealing with the world of fashion.”


Captain Amyas

“Masterly.”--_San Francisco Examiner._

“Startlingly plain spoken.”--_Louisville Courier-Journal._


The Rat Trap

“The literary sensation of the year.”--_Philadelphia Item._


The Story of Eden

“Bold and outspoken, a startling book.”--_Chicago Record-Herald._

“A real feeling of brilliant sunshine and exhilarating
air.”--_Spectator._


Rose-White Youth.

⁂ The love-story of a young girl.


The Pathway of the Pioneer.

⁂ The story of seven girls who have banded themselves together for
mutual help and cheer under the name of “Nous Autres.” They represent,
collectively, the professions open to women of no deliberate training,
though well educated. They are introduced to the reader at one of their
weekly gatherings and then the author proceeds to depict the home and
business life of each one individually.




L. C. VIOLETT HOUK


The Girl in Question

 _Ornamental cloth_  _12mo_  _$1.50_

An American love-story dealing with diplomatic life and political
intrigue. The romance of what a young and beautiful girl accomplished
under most difficult circumstances.




A. C FOX-DAVIES


The Finances of Sir John Kynnersley

 _Ornamental cloth._      _12mo._  _$1.50_

Represents an arch type of the clever swindler. Filled with exciting
episodes, worthy of the attention of Sherlock Holmes.


The Dangerville Inheritance

 _12mo._  _$1.50_

A Detective Story

“A detective story of which Gaboriau might be proud.”--_London Post._

“Of the Wilkie Collins pattern.”--_New York Times._

“Plenty of excitement.”--_Detroit News-Tribune._


The Mauleverer Murders

 _12mo._  _$1.50_

A Detective Story

“As an inventor of puzzles the author of ‘The Mauleverer Murders’
is entitled to honorable rank. We have not, in a long time, read a
detective story in which the crucial secret was better kept than in
this tale. Decidedly, this is a detective story to make the jaded
connoisseur of clever sensationalism ‘sit up.’”--_New York Tribune._




THOMAS COBB


The Chichester Intrigue

 _Ornamental cloth_  _12mo_  _$1.50_

A love-story with a good plot based upon the accidental discovery of
a package of love-letters, which came into hands of one for whom they
were not intended.




J. M. DIVER


Captain Desmond, V.C.

 _Ornamental cloth_  _12mo_  _$1.50_

“A story of the Punjab frontier. The theme is that of Kipling’s ‘Story
of the Gadsbys’--a brilliant and convincing study of an undying
problem.”--_London Post._


The Great Amulet

 _12mo._  _$1.50_

A love-story dealing with army life in India.




EMERY POTTLE


Handicapped. An American Love-story.

 _Ornamental cloth._  _12mo._  _$1.50_

⁂ A stirring romance dealing with fashionable life in New York and the
hunting set in the country. A strong love-story based upon an unusual
theme.




M. P. WILLCOCKS


The Wingless Victory

 _12mo_  _Cloth_  _$1.50_

“A moving drama of passion, of frailty, of long temptation and of
ultimate triumph over it.”--_Pall Mall Gazette._

“A most remarkable novel which places the author in the first rank.
This is a novel built to last.”--_Outlook._

“A book worth keeping on the shelves, even by the classics, for it is
painted in colors which do not fade.”--_Times._

“Fresh and fervent, instinct with genuine passion and emotion and all
the fierce primitive joys of existence. It is an excellent thing for
any reader to come across this book.”--_Standard._

“A splendid book.”--_Tribune._


A Man of Genius

 _Ornamental cloth_  _12mo_  _$1.50_

A powerful love-story.


Widdicombe: A Romance of the Devonshire Moors

 _12mo_  _$1.50_




THOMAS BAILEY CLEGG


The Bishop’s Scapegoat

 _Ornamental cloth_  _12mo_  _$1.50_

A romance dealing with the punishment for a crime committed many years
ago.


The Wilderness.

 _12mo._      _$1.50_

“A novel of strong ethical significance, related in a masterly manner.
A story of compelling interest.”


The Love Child

 _12mo._  _$1.50_




JOHN G. NEIHARDT


The Lonesome Trial

 _Illustrated_  _12mo_  _$1.50_

THE WEST AND FRONTIER LIFE

Mr. Neihardt’s stories of the trapper and the Indian are well known to
the readers of the magazines of the day. They pulsate with the spirit
of Western life.

“The most virile and original note since Jack London.”




GERTRUDE ATHERTON


Patience Sparhawk and Her Times

 _12mo._  _$1.50_

“Reached a genuine height in American fiction. Powerful.”--_Town
Topics._


A Daughter of the Vine

 _12mo._  _$1.50_


The Californians: A Novel

 _12mo._  _$1.50_

“Her Californians are studies from life.”--_The Dial._


Senator North

 _Decorative cloth._  _12mo._  _$1.50_

“Has genuine historical value.”--_Outlook._


His Fortunate Grace

 _12mo._  _$1.25_


The Aristocrats

  _Decorative cloth._  _12mo._  _$1.50_

“Deserves more than one reading.”--_New York Mail._




HENRY HARLAND


The Cardinal’s Snuff-Box

 _12mo._  _$1.50_


Grey Roses

 _12mo._  _$1.25_


Comedies and Errors

 _12mo._  _$1.50_


The Lady Paramount

 _12mo._  _$1.30_


Mademoiselle Miss, and Other Stories

 _12mo._  _$1.25_




HENRY SUDERMANN


The Undying Past

 _12mo._  _$1.50_

“A romance of profound and absorbing interest--a transcript of
life, sentiment and passion that holds true in all tongues and
times.”--_Philadelphia North American._


Regina; or The Sins of the Father

 _12mo._  _$1.50_

“It is a powerful work of fiction, imbued with the Nietzschean scorn of
conventional morality that sweeps like a wind-storm through so much of
recent German literature.”--_The Dial._




RICHARD LE GALLIENNE


The Quest of the Golden Girl

 _12mo._  _$1.50_

“Charm is the word which best describes the pervading quality of this
book.”--_Critic._




THE NEW POCKET LIBRARY

_Uniform Editions. Boxed_

Printed from a clear type upon a specially thin and opaque paper
manufactured for the series


Anthony Trollope.

  16 volumes in dark olive green cloth or leather, boxed.

    Dr. Thorne
    Framley Parsonage
    Castle Richmond
    The Macdermots of Ballycloran
    Barchester Towers
    The Bertrams
    Orley Farm (2 vols.)
    The Warden
    The Three Clerks
    Rachel Ray
    Can you Forgive Her? (2 vols.)
    The Small House at Allington (2 vols.)
    The Kellys and the O’Kellys

 _Flexible leather, $12.00 net_  _Cloth, $8.00 net_  _Express 50 cents_


George Borrow.

  5 volumes in dark olive green.

    Lavengro
    The Romany Rye
    The Bible in Spain
    The Zincali
    Wild Wales

 _Flexible leather, $3.50 net_  _Cloth, $2.50 net_  _Express 25 cents_


 Beaconsfield.

  A reissue of the Novels of the Earl of Beaconsfield. Each with an
  Introduction by the Earl of Iddesleigh.

    Sybil
    Tancred
    Venetia
    Contarini Fleming
    Coningsby
    Henrietta
    Temple
    Vivian Grey

    {The Young Duke
    {The Rise of Iskander
    {The Infernal Marriage

    {Alroy
    {Popanilla
    {Count Alarcos
    {Ixion in Heaven

_9 volumes in flexible leather, $6.50 net 9 volumes in cloth, $4.50 net
Express 50 cents_


George Eliot

    Adam Bede
    The Mill on the Floss
    Silas Marner
    Scenes of Clerical Life

 _4 volumes in flexible leather, $3.00 net_
 _4 volumes in cloth, $2.00 net_
 _Express 25 cents_




GILBERT K. CHESTERTON


Heretics. Essays.

 _12mo._  _$1.50 net._  _Postage 12 cents._

“Always entertaining.”--_New York Evening Sun._

“Always original.”--_Chicago Tribune._


Orthodoxy. Uniform with “Heretics.”

 _12mo._  _$1.50 net._  _Postage 12 cents._

“Here is a man with something to say.”--_Brooklyn Life._


All Things Considered.

  Essays on various subjects, such as:

    Conceit and Caricature; Spiritualism; Science and Religion;
    Woman, etc.

 _12mo._  _$1.50 net._  _Postage 12 cents._


The Napoleon of Notting Hill.

 _12mo._  _$1.50._

“A brilliant piece of satire, gemmed with ingenious paradox.”--_Boston
Herald._




CHARLES H. SHERRILL


Stained Glass Tours in France.

How to reach the examples of XIIIth, XIVth, XVth and XVIth Century
Stained Glass in France (with maps and itineraries) and what they are.
_Ornamental cloth. 12mo. Profusely illustrated. $1.50 net. Postage 14
cents._

⁂ “The author wastes no time on technicalities, and it will be hard for
the reader not to share the author’s enthusiasm.”--_New York Sun._




FRANK RUTTER


The Path to Paris.

The Record of a Riverside Journey from Le Havre to Paris. 62
Illustrations. _Cloth. 8vo. $5.00 net. Postage 20 cents._

⁂ A delightful account of a journey along the banks of the Seine.
Impressions and adventures. Descriptions of historic and artistic
associations. Of special value are the remarkable illustrations by
Hanslip Fletcher.




VERNON LEE


Uniform sets boxed. _8 vols. Cloth. $12.00 net. Express extra. $1.50
net each. Postage 10 cents._

    Limbo and Other Essays: “Ariadne in Mantua”
    Pope Jacynth, and Other Fantastic Tales
    Hortus Vitæ, or the Hanging Gardens
    The Sentimental Traveller
    The Enchanted Woods
    The Spirit of Rome
    Genius Loci
    Hauntings

⁂ “If we were asked to name the three authors writing in English
to-day to whom the highest rank of cleverness and brilliancy might
be accorded, we would not hesitate to place among them VERNON
LEE.”--_Baltimore Sun._




ELIZABETH BISLAND


The Secret Life. Being the Book of a Heretic.

 _12mo._  _$1.50 net._  _Postage 10 cents_

“A book of untrammelled thought on living topics ... extraordinarily
interesting.”--_Philadelphia Press._

“Excellent style, quaint humor, and shrewd philosophy.”--_Review of
Reviews._




W. COMPTON LEITH


Apologia Diffidentis. An intimate personal book.

 _Cloth. 8vo._  _$2.50 net._  _Postage 15 cents._

⁂ “Mr. LEITH formulates the anatomy of diffidence as Burton did of
melancholy; and it might almost be said that he has done it with equal
charm. The book surpasses in beauty and distinction of style any other
prose work of the past few years. Its charm is akin to that of Mr.
A. C. Benson’s earlier books, yet Mr. Benson at his best has never
equalled this.... A human document as striking as it is unusual.... The
impress of truth and wisdom lies deep upon every page.”--_The Dial._




THE CREED OF BUDDHA


By the author of “_The Creed of Christ_.”

 _Cloth._  _12mo._  _$1.50 net._  _Postage 10 cts._

⁂ An able study of the inner faith of the founder of Buddhism,
containing many conclusions diametrically opposed to popular views.




THE CREED OF CHRIST


By the Author of “_The Creed of Buddha_.”

 _Cloth._  _12mo._  _$1.25 net._  _Postage 10 cents._

⁂ “As remarkable as ‘Ecce Homo.’”--_Rev. R. J. Campbell._

⁂ “Able and well written.”--_The Living Church._




FREDERIKA MACDONALD


The Iliad of the East.

A Selection of Legends drawn from the Sanskrit Poem _The Rāmāyana_.
Illustrations and Cover Design by J. LOCKWOOD KIPLING.

 _Cloth._  _12mo._  _$2.00 net._  _Postage 12 cents._

⁂ The Rāmāyana is one of the great epics of the East, corresponding
to the Homeric poems of Greece. The purpose of the author has been
to bring to the Western readers the beauties of mind and imagination
contained in Oriental literature.




DR. A. S. CRAPSEY


The Re-Birth of Religion

 _Cloth._  _12mo._  _$1.50 net._  _Postage 12 cents_

⁂ It is the author’s purpose to make clear why it is that the
intellectual world has rejected, and must continue to reject, dogmatic
teaching. He also endeavors to explain why moral earnestness and
enthusiasm for humanity must seek expression outside, rather than
inside, the various ecclesiastical organizations.

“Strongly marked by admirable sincerity of purpose.... The author is
well fitted to his task by a transparent honesty, a marked scholarship,
and an enviable lucidity of diction.”--_The Argonaut._

“It would be a delightful task to read more books from this heretic who
writes in such simple, clear style on the most abstruse topics.”--_The
Toronto Globe._




S. BARING-GOULD

 _Illustrated._  _8vo._  _$5.00 net each._  _Postage 20 cents._


Devonshire Characters and Strange Events.

Profusely illustrated with Reproductions from Old and Rare Prints.


Cornish Characters and Strange Events.

⁂ A collection of accounts of personages either born in or connected
with Cornwall. Uniform with “Devonshire Characters.”




IDA WOODWARD


In and Around the Isle of Purbeck.

Thirty-six Illustrations in color.

 _Crown 4to._  _$5.00 net._  _Postage 28 cents._

⁂ The text deals with the history and description of the Isle, of its
antiquity, its old families, its association with the Revolution, etc.




CAROLINE CORNER


Ceylon: The Paradise of Adam.

The Record of Seven Years’ Residence in the Island.

 _Cloth._  _8vo._  _$4.00 net._  _Postage 18 cents._

 _Sixteen full-page illustrations reproduced from valuable photographs._

⁂ A comprehensive account of life in Ceylon, written in a breezy and
entertaining style. The author has secured the golden key to this
unexplored labyrinth, and by its magic turn opens for others the
portals of this wonderful Paradise.




MAUDE M. HOLBACH


Dalmatia: The Borderland ’twixt East and West.

Fifty illustrations and maps of this fascinating country, with its
Roman remains, walled cities, interesting architecture and beautiful
scenery. _12mo. $1.50 net. Postage 14 cents._




POEMS WORTH HAVING


Stephen Phillips

NEW POEMS, including IOLE: A Tragedy in One Act; LAUNCELOT AND
GUINEVERE, ENDYMION, and many other hitherto unpublished poems.

 _Cloth, 12mo_  _$1.25 net_  _Half morocco, $4.00 net_
 _Postage 10 cents_

“I have read the ‘New Poems’ of Stephen Phillips with the greatest
interest. In my judgment it is the best volume that he has ever
published.”--Wm. Lyon Phelps of Yale University.

_Uniform Sets._ 4 volumes, including NEW POEMS, POEMS, PAOLO AND
FRANCESCA, HEROD.

 _Cloth, $5.00 net_  _Half morocco, $15.00 net_  _Express 50 cents_


Laurence Hope

COMPLETE WORKS. Uniform Edition 3 volumes. 12mo. Bound in red cloth, in
box.

India’s Love Lyrics, including “The Garden of Kama.” Stars of the Desert

Last Poems. Translations from the Book of Indian Love.

 _Cloth, $4.50 net_  _Postage 35 cents_  _Half morocco, $12.00_
 _Postage 50 cents_

“The comparison of Laurence Hope to Sappho readily suggested itself to
the admiring reviewers of her first book of poems.... The compliment
was fully deserved.... As a singer of the melancholy of love and
passion, Laurence Hope surpasses Swinburne in intensity of feeling and
beauty of thought.”--_New York Evening Mail._


The Poems of Arthur Symons

A Collected Edition of the Poet’s works issued in two volumes with a
Photogravure Portrait as Frontispiece.

 _8vo_  _$3.00 net_  _Half morocco, $10.00_  _Postage 24 cents_


The Fool of the World, and Other Poems

By ARTHUR SYMONS

 _12mo_  _$1.50 net_  _Half morocco, $5.00_  _Postage 15 cents_

“Stands at the head of all British poets of his generation.”--_New York
Evening Post._


The Poems of William Watson

Edited and arranged with an introduction by J. A. SPENDER.

 _In 2 volumes_  _12mo_  _Cloth, $2.50 net_  _Half morocco, $7.50 net_
 _Photogravure Portrait_  _Postage 20 cents_

“The lover of poetry cannot fail to rejoice in this handsome
edition.”--_Philadelphia Press._

“Work which will live, one may venture to say, as long as the
language.”--_Philadelphia Public Ledger._


The Poems of Samuel Taylor Coleridge

A complete illustrated edition of the poems of the author of
“Christabel,” “The Ancient Mariner,” etc. Several hitherto unpublished
poems are included in this edition.

 _8vo_  _$3.50 net_  _Postage 25 cents_


The Poems of Ernest Dowson

Illustrations and a Cover-design by Aubrey Beardsley. An Introductory
Memoir by Arthur Symons, and a Portrait.

“Belongs to the class that Rossetti does, with a touch of Herrick, and
something which is Dowson; and Dowson alone.”--Dr. Talcott Williams in
_Book News_.

 _12mo_  _$1.50 net_  _Half morocco, $4.00_  _Postage 10 cents_


Sappho

Memoir, Text, Selected Renderings, and a Literal Translation by HENRY
THORNTON WHARTON. Illustrated in Photogravure. _New Edition._

 _$2.00 net_  _Postage 10 cents_


A Shropshire Lad.

By A. E. HOUSMAN. _New Edition_

 _12mo_  _Cloth, $1.00 net_  _Half morocco, $3.00 net_
 _Postage 5 cents_

“Mr. Housman’s verse has a very rare charm, due to its blending of a
subdued and poignant sadness with the old pagan glorification of the
beauty and the sacredness of youth.”--_The Sun_, New York.

“The best in ‘A Shropshire Lad’ is altogether memorable; you cannot
shake it off or quote it awry.”--_Chap Book._

“Something to please on every page.”--_Brooklyn Eagle._


The Wind Among the Reeds.

By W. B. YEATS.

 _12mo_  _$1.25 net_  _Half morocco, $5.00 net_  _Postage 10 cents_

“The genuine spirit of Irish antiquity and Irish folklore--the very
spirit of the myth-makers is in him.”--Mr. William Archer.


The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam

Rendered into English verse by EDWARD FITZGERALD. With 9 illustrations.
(Flowers of Parnassus Series.)

 _Leather, 75 cents net_  _Cloth, 50 cents net_  _Postage 4 cents_

A Paraphrase from Several Literal Translations. By RICHARD LE
GALLIENNE. New Edition with fifty additional quatrains. With
Cover-design by Will Bradley.

 _12mo_  _$1.50 net_  _Postage 6 cents_




The International Studio

_An Illustrated Magazine of Fine and Applied Art_


 PUBLISHED BY JOHN LANE COMPANY
 THE BODLEY HEAD
 110-114 West Thirty-second Street   :   NEW YORK CITY

 _50 cents  per month_

[Illustration]

 _Annual Subscription $5.00_

 _Three Months’ Trial Subscription, $1.00_

¶ One Specimen Back Number of the Magazine will be sent to any Address
in the United States on Receipt of Ten Cents


It is the aim of “THE INTERNATIONAL STUDIO” to treat of every Art and
Craft--Architecture, Sculpture, Painting, Ceramics, Metal, Glass,
Furniture, House Decoration, Design, Bookbinding, Illustrating,
Photography, Lithography, Enamel, Jewelry, Needlework, Landscape
Gardening, etc. The principal writers on art are contributors to its
pages. Many original illustrations, reproduced in every variety of
black and white process, half-tone, line, photogravure, etc., are to
be found in each number. Color plates of real value are to be found in
every issue.




Transcriber’s Note


 • Punctuation and other obvious typographic inaccuracies were silently
   corrected.

 • Archaic and variable spelling has been preserved.

 • Variations in hyphenation and compound words have been preserved.

 • Text in italics is enclosed in _underscores_.

 • Text in small capitals converted to ALL CAPS.


Corrections

 • p. 55:  _must have had a companion_ to _must have a companion_.
 • p. 266: _who was always been_ to _who has always been_.
